.TH AUTOINDEX 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
autoindex \- \fIFirstBase\fP automatic index maintenance
.SH SYNOPSIS
Description of the \fIFirstBase\fP auto index mechanism
.SH DESCRIPTION
A formal mechanism for maintaining complex indexes is provided for
\fIFirstBase\fP databases via a simple file which lists all automatic indexes.
Each of the indexes listed will be maintained across database insertions,
deletions and modifications.
.PP
The name of the file containing the list uses the basename of the database,
with a \fI.auto\fP extension (as in dbase.auto).
The index names are listed one per line. Each line can contain an optional
\fIunique\fP flag, the flag \fB-u\fP, which causes the auto index to
be checked for unique values at record write time from the \fIFirstBase\fP
database editors.
.PP
All indexes are initialized at \fIopendb\fP(3) time and closed by the
\fIclosedb\fP(3) function. Each index must have an associated index
dictionary (the index.idicti file). Furthermore, each index will be
stored as a \fIFirstBase\fP Btree index, and will be a dense index,
meaning all records of the database will be reflected in the index.
In other words, these indexes are represent the full set of database
records, not sub sets.
.PP
Within the database header structure, an array (\fIb_autoindex\fP)
of fb_autoindex structure pointers is allocated, each containing all the
elements needed for one Btree index.
These automatic Btree indexes
store their array of field pointers in b_autoindex[N]->ix_ip,
where N means the Nth index.
.PP
These automatic
indexes, although not tied to the default index within a database structure,
are maintained during calls to \fIaddrec\fP(3), \fIputrec\fP(3), and
\fIdelrec\fP(3). These indexes can be swapped into a database structure
using \fIuseidx\fP(3) so that calls to \fIgetxrec\fP(3) use a particular
index. Additionally, new indexes can be added to the autoindex array
at run time using \fIaddidx\fP(3).
.PP
This method of automatic indexes subsumes the older method of
listing auto indexes within the database dictionary. As such,
do not list auto indexes in the dbase.auto file which are also listed
in the dbase.ddict file.
.PP
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.auto
\fIFirstBase\fP autoindex dictionary/list.
.TP 10
*.idicti
\fIFirstBase\fP index dictionary.
.TP 10
*.idict
\fIFirstBase\fP index header.
.TP 10
*.bseq
\fIFirstBase\fP Btree sequence set.
.TP 10
*.bidx
\fIFirstBase\fP Btree index set.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbigen(1), dbdind(1), openidx(3), useidx(3).
.br
