.TH CHOICE 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
choice \- choice file for data entry
.SH SYNOPSIS
Layout of the \fIFirstBase\fP choice files
.SH DESCRIPTION
A \fIFirstBase\fP
choice file is a file that is used from \fIdbedit\fP(1) or
\fIdbvedit\fP(1) for providing very
strict control over data entry of a particular field. The idea is that the
user does not need to actually type out all of the input for a given
field, but rather chooses a selection whose corresponding meaning is
then inserted into the field.
.PP
This makes uniform data entry for fields with a set of known values
quite easy \(em and eases the typing required for long, duplicate entries.
.PP
A \fIFirstBase\fP choice file consists of a series of choices, one choice per line.
Each line is separated into three distinct areas by white space.
These three areas are: the choice, the meaning, and comments.
Anything past the second word (as defined by white space) is considered to
be a comment. This comment line is displayed during the choice input also.
.PP
For example, the following choice file could be used to make sure that
characters representing a color are installed into a field as opposed to
some garbage input:
.sp 1
.nf
.ft CW
1 Red The color red.
2 Blue The color blue.
3 Green The color green.
4 Yellow The color yellow.
5 Orange The color orange.
.ft
.fi
.PP
Note that if field has a default value, then a <RETURN> is acceptable at
the choice input screen. Otherwise, a selection must be made.
In this simplistic example, the only valid selections are 1 through 5.
.PP
There are also two other types of control lines that can appear
in a choice file that are used by \fIdbvedit\fP(1).
Choice file lines of the form \fB"XYZ":row,col\fP will create persistent
comments through all of the screens. Also, a line of the 
form \fB$HELP helpfile\fP will specify an \fIadditional\fP helpfile for use
during the actual choice input.
.PP
Fields that use
nested choice files can also be built. These choice fields will allow a
nested set of choice menus to be used for data entry. As the user goes
through the nested levels, the values are saved and the whole string
is returned to the user as the value of the field, with each individual
choice or attribute separated by a '|' marker.
.PP
A nested choice file is a file that contains a set of individual choice
menus linked together by the use of unique labeling. For example,
this mechanism allows a set of distinct Version Numbers to be picked from
for each of a list of Operating Systems.
Such a choice file would look like:
.sp 1
.nf
.ft CW
s Sun_Microsystems
d Digital_Equipment
a Apple

$s
1 3.4 Version 3.4
2 3.5 Version 3.5
3 4.0 Version 4.0
4 $INPUT

$d
1 2.1 Version 2.1
2 2.2 Version 2.2
3 2.3 Version 2.3

$a
1 9.1 Version 9.1
2 9.2 Version 9.2
3 9.3 Version 9.3
.ft
.fi
.PP
Note the use of the unique labels \fB$s\fP, \fB$d\fP and
\fB$a\fP. Each menu that is to be nested must be labeled. The label
consists of the actual typed choice, with a prepended \fB$\fP character.
.PP
Another feature of choice files is the ability to override any presented
choices, entering a new string of the users choice. The special meta-token
value, \fB$INPUT\fP \(em used in the example above \(em is used to force
entry of a non-standard choice value.
Additionally, by using the \fB$INPUT*\fP meta-token, these user-entered
choice values will be marked with an asterisk (*) at the end of the field.
.PP 1
Note that the sub screen display mechanism can be disabled by
using the type \fIC\fP for choice instead of \fIc\fP.
In this case, the field editing behaves like macro expansion,
i.e. all other choice field behavior will stay the same.
.sp 1
Under normal operation a selection of a value for a
choice field fails if the choice is undefined. However, \fIdbvedit\fP(1)
and \fIdbvemit\fP(1)
have the ability to add new choices defined by the user during record entry
to the proper choice file. To enable this feature, the AddChoice Flag (-A)
for the individual field must be set from \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
.sp 1
.SH SEE ALSO
dbedit(1), dbdbas(1), setup(5), xchoice(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
