.TH DBCAT 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbcat \- concatenate \fIFirstBase\fP databases
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbcat
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP]
[\fB-o\fP \fIoutput\fP] \fIdatabase\fP [\fIdatabase\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbcat
takes an arbitrary number of \fIFirstBase\fP databases and concatenates
them end to
end to create a single \fIFirstBase\fP database. All record totals are modified
accordingly.
.PP
If only one database is specified, \fIdbcat\fP(1)
will ask for another database name.
If an output file specifying the output database is not provided using
the \fB-o\fP flag, \fIdbcat\fP(1) will ask for an output file name.
The default name (achieved by hitting <RETURN> at the output file name prompt)
is \fIconcat\fP.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode,
suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
The first database dictionary \fIdbcat\fP(1)
encounters
is assumed to be the shape of all subsequent databases.
Beyond checking that a file is actually a \fIFirstBase\fP database, 
no other error checking is done to determine whether the current
database matches the size and shape of the first one.
If a file is not a \fIFirstBase\fP database, an error message is given, and 
processing continues.
.PP
Note that \fIdbcat\fP(1) does not follow indexes, but concatenates
all undeleted records of each database to the output database.
.PP
\fIDbcat\fP(1)
allows an interesting tool oriented approach to data entry and data base
management systems.
Users can create personal databases that all have the same shape or
structure by using the same database dictionary. Then
each can work on their own database independent of others.
When all are done, the databases can be concatenated together to form
the union of all the databases.
.PP
Note: \fIdbclean\fP(1)
is automatically run at the completion of this program to
create a map file for the new database.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database. 
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary.
.TP 10
concat
default output file name for \fIdbcat\\fIfP\fP(1).
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbcgen(1), dbedit(1), dbjoin(1), firstbase(5)
.PP
\fIFirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual\fP
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If fed conflicting databases, \fIdbcat\fP(1) will die a terrible death.
.br
