.TH DBCGEN 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbcgen \- generate a converted \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbcgen
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP] [\fB-B\fP]
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbcgen
generates a converted \fIFirstBase\fP database using a conversion 
dictionary defined via
\fIdbdcnv\fP(1).
This conversion dictionary is used to determine 
the size, shape, and structure of the new database.
.PP
This tool uses a \fIFirstBase\fP index to generate the output in sorted order.
If this index is detected to be out of date or non-existent, it will
be regenerated \fIautomatically\fP. An index is out of date if 
either the database or the index dictionary have changed.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode,
suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP
flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
The \fB-B\fP flag will enable the fastest throughput of
records from the database. In this case, the entire database is used,
and the \fIdbcgen\fP generation is speeded up by internal record buffering.
Note that an index will be NOT be used with record buffering,
and record locking is disabled. However, the \fB-i\fP argument is still
required so that \fIdbcgen\fP can locate the
the conversion dictionary (\fIdbdcnv\fP(1)).
.PP
The following discussion refers to using the generator interactively
without the batch mode or yes mode flags.
.PP
\fIDbcgen\fP(1)
first displays an image of the converted database-to-be and
its file name.
The user has a chance to abort here. After the database conversion, 
\fIdbcgen\fP(1) creates a new database dictionary for the new database.
.PP
Dbcgen can change the size, shape and structure of a valid \fIFirstBase\fP 
database. Existing database fields can be lengthened, shortened, or deleted.
New fields can also be added.
See 
\fIdbdcnv\fP(1)
for more conversion details.
.PP
Note: \fIdbclean\fP(1)
is automatically run at the completion of this program to
create a map file for the new database.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
index
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.?dict
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP dbase or index.
.TP 10
*.idictc
dictionary for conversion generator.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdbas(1), dbedit(1), dbdcnv(1), generators(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbcgen\fP(1)
pauses to ask permission to destroy an existing
\fIFirstBase\fP database. A valid \fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary is
required for the input database.
.br
