.TH DBCHECK 8 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbcheck \- run a file integrity check on a \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbcheck
[ \fB-clptvB\fP ] \fIdatabase\fP [ \fIdatabase\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbcheck
is used to check the integrity of a \fIFirstBase\fP database and its associated
map file. \fIDbcheck\fP attempts to account for all of the
bytes in the database.
.PP
\fIDbcheck\fP also makes sure that all records and fields are distinct
and well defined by the map file. In general, various errors are indicated
with a notation like \fI--> error: message\fP. If the database checks out,
a final message stating \fIno errors\fP is printed.
.PP
The various flags are used to track and check extra items during the
checking process.
.sp 1
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B -c
check the connectivity of the addresses in the map file. On by default.
.TP 10
.B -l
check the lengths of the fields for size discrepancies.
.TP 10
.B -p
display percent in use statistics. On by default.
.TP 10
.B -t
trace the values of each field as a record is processed. Each field is
separated by a colon, ':'. Large databases will create massive amounts of
screen output when this option is used.
.TP 10
.B -v
verbose flag. Uses flags \fB-c\fP, \fB-l\fP, \fB-p\fP.
Use of the verbose option will generate internal information about the
location and length of each record.
.TP 10
.B -B
Blocking flag to
will enable the fastest throughput of
records from the database. If this flag can be used, the \fIdbcheck\fP
process is speeded up a great deal by internal record buffering.
Note that the database map is not checked for connectivity and
record locking is disabled.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.map
\fIFirstBase\fP database map file.
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbclean(1), dbregen(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
