.TH DBCLEAN 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbclean \- clean a \fIFirstBase\fP database and create a map file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I dbclean
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP] [\fB-f\fP]
\fIdatabase\fP [\fIdatabase\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbclean
cleans a \fIFirstBase\fP database, removing all free and fragmented
storage areas in the database, and creates
a new record map for the database.
This cleaning is done on a byte by byte
basis, making any existing indexes for the database unusable.
(But, see \fIdbregen\fP(1) to regenerate all indexes).
.PP
To determine the amount of free and fragmented space in a \fIFirstBase\fP
database, use \fIdbcheck\fP(8).
.PP
The \fB-b\fP flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode,
suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
In normal operation, cleaning is done only if a map file is lost,
or disk space needs reclaiming. However, \fIFirstBase\fP databases should be
cleaned once they become static or are to be taken off line.
.PP
The \fB-f\fP flag is used to force a \fIdbclean\fP(1) to run. Normally, if
a database is shut down in an unknown state, i.e. becomes "dirty",
dbclean(1) will not work. The idea is to force the use of \fIdbdump\fP(8) and
\fIdbrestor\fP(8). However, by using the \fB-f\fP
option, dbclean will do its best to clean up the database.
.PP
There are a few \fIFirstBase\fP tools that automatically run \fIdbclean\fP(1)
when they have
completed their tasks. These tools are
\fIdbcgen\fP(1),
\fIdbcat\fP(1),
\fIdbjoin\fP(1),
\fIdbload\fP(1),
and \fIdbpack\fP(1).
All of these tools, except \fIdbpack\fP(1), create
a new database, making the cleaning necessary. \fIDbpack\fP(1) disturbs the
order of the existing records, making post cleaning a necessity also.
.PP
At the end of normal processing, \fIdbclean\fP(1)
runs \fIdbregen\fP(1) to recreate
any autoindexes defined for the \fIFirstBase\fP database. The user only
needs to worry
about any indexes that are non-automatic. These will need to be
regenerated (\fIdbregen\fP(1), \fIdbigen\fP(1)).
.PP
Note: since cleaning a database aligns a new data map with the data file,
the index generators, \fIdbregen\fP(1) and \fIdbigen\fP(1) are passed
the \fB-B\fP argument flag to enable record blocking.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.map
\fIFirstBase\fP database map file.
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.TP 10
 .DBCLN_??????
Temporary file used to build the new database.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbcheck(8), dbregen(1), dbcgen(1), dbcat(1), dbjoin(1), dbload(1),
dbpack(1), dbdump(8), dbrestor(8)
.PP
\fIFirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual\fP
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Again, \fIdbclean\fP(1) will make any existing non-automatic
indexes for the \fIFirstBase\fP database
unusable. These indexes will need to be regenerated.
.sp 1
Also, \fIdbclean\fP(1) needs to be run in the same directory as the
database (or at least on the same logical device) as temporary storage is
used in the current working directory to build the new database.
.br
