.TH DBDBAS 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbdbas \- define a \fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbdbas
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbdbas
allows definition and modification of a 
.I FirstBase
database dictionary. This dictionary will be used by 
\fIdbedit\fP(1)
to create and maintain the actual database. Furthermore, virtually
every program in the 
.I FirstBase
system reads this dictionary to determine the size and shape
of the database it is working on.
.PP
A database dictionary consists of 
a series of field descriptors. Each field descriptor contains at least
three field attributes:
.I field_name, field_type,
and
.I field_size.
These and optional field attributes are described below.
.PP
\fIDbdbas\fP(1)
allows creation and deletion of field descriptors, as well as modification
of field attributes without disturbing attributes already in place.
The overall effect is a 
.I database-dictionary 
.I screen editor
complete with an auto add mode, as well as insert and delete capabilities.
.PP
A list of simple editor commands appears on the 24th line of the 
screen at all times, with the standard help signal offering a longer
summary of possible commands.
Complete interactive error checking is done on the contents of
all attributes.
.PP
The following is a list of all field attributes and their purpose:
.TP 8
.B name
gives a label to a field. 
This label or field name
appears on all screens involving the corresponding field, and 
is also used to match indexes with \fIFirstBase\fP
generator requests, etc. Unique naming is enforced (i.e. it is an error for
two fields to have the same label as their names). The name needs to be 
alphanumeric also, although blanks are allowed.
.TP 8
.B type
provides the type code of the field. Valid types are:
.sp 1
.B a 
- alphanumeric
.br
.B b 
- binary
.br
.B A 
- alpha
.br
.B c
- choice
.br
.B C
- choice (no screen display)
.br
.B d 
- date
.br
.B f 
- floating point
.br
.B F
- Formula (virtual)
.br
.B L
- Link (to another database)
.br
.B n 
- numeric
.br
.B N 
- positive numeric (>= 0)
.br
.B U 
- Uppercase. (Alphanumeric).
.br
.B X 
- Extended Choice/Help.
.br
.B $ 
- dollar
.sp 1
Input into the described field (using dbedit)
will be checked according to the value
of this field attribute. Note that binary fields can only be manipulated
through the use of the FirstBase Library routines \fIfetch\fP(3) and \fIstore\fP(3).
.sp 1
For more details on the behavior of each of these field types, see the
chapter on dbedit in the \fIFirstBase\fP User's Guide and Reference Manual.
.TP 8
.B size
maximum size of the field. This size is limited only by the hardware.
.TP 8
.B default
characters that match the type of the field that are used in case of
user default when editing the field (using \fIdbedit\fP(1)).
If no default attribute is defined, the
field is given 
.B *forced entry* 
status. If blanks are used as the default,
this is redisplayed as a single '_' (underscore) for visibility.
.sp 1
Special meta-defaults that allow softer, less rigid defaults are:
.sp 1
.RS 8
.TP 14
.B $AUTODATE
is not really a true default, just an aid. AUTODATE is used for large text
fields that are intended to be used as note collection places, i.e. for
phone logs or meeting notes. When a long field is edited using the visual
editor, \fIdbvedit\fP(1) will concatenate the current date and time
to the end of the field before the user gets it.
.TP 14
.B $AUTOINCR
consults the pre defined auto index to determine the last number in use.
This number is incremented and used when writing the current record.
Until that time, a \fB*\fP marker is used. (The marker is used in case the
record is aborted without being saved).
.sp 1
Remember:
the field using this auto increment feature MUST be auto indexed.
Auto increments work in a multi-user environment.
Also, there is an environment variable, \fIFORCEAUTOINCR\fP, that can be
used to alleviate the need for the <RETURN> during editing of these fields.
.sp 1
Additionally, for ensured proper behavior, fields using the automatic
increment function should be locked (see \fBlock\fP below) so that
the increment key is not overwritten (inadvertently).
.TP 14
.B $DATE
defaults to current date.
.TP 14
.B $INCR
defaults to 'previous entry plus one'.
.TP 14
.B $MINUS
defaults to current entry for the field, minus one.
.TP 14
.B $MTIME
defaults to the current (military) time. Format is HH:MM:SS.
.TP 14
.B $NPREV
defaults to negative of previous entry for that field.
.TP 14
.B $PLUS
defaults to current entry for the field, plus one.
.TP 14
.B $PREV
defaults to previous entry for that field.
.TP 14
.B $TIME
defaults to the current time. Format is HH:MM.
.TP 14
.B $USER
defaults to the name of the user.
.br
.sp 1
.RE 8
'	# need to reset the outside layer for note. use 'blank' label.
.TP 8
\
\
.br
.sp 1
Note: all database fields have their own increment and previous areas
that are used for $INCR and $PREV.
.sp 1
In the case of a 
.B formula
field, the default input is specialized to achieve formula input.
Formulas use numbers to represent fields (i.e. 16 for field 16)
and a prepended 'C' or 'c' for constants (i.e. C4.5 for 4.5).
Addition 
.B (+), 
subtraction 
.B (-), 
multiplication 
.B (*), 
and division
.B (/)
are allowed as operators. 
.sp 1
.B Note:
Only dollar, float, numeric and positive numeric
fields can be used in formula
calculations. This means references to other formulas will not work.
Also, all formulas read from left to right, and there is no precedence
among the operators.
.sp 1
The precision of a formula is specified by appending a colon 
.B (:)
to the formula followed by a number.
Default precision is two.
.sp 1
For example, if field 5 is hours and field 16 is days, then
.I 5*C4.5:2
would specify a field that would show the pay due to anyone working
at $4.50 per hour. And
.I 5/16:6
would show the average number of hours worked per day, carried out to
six (6) decimal places.
.sp 1
All formula entries are parsed to determine whether the formula is valid
at that moment, with interactive error messages to help debug long
formulas. This means re-editing of a formula may be necessary if it has
forward references in it. (A forward reference is a reference to a field
not yet defined).
.sp 1
Note: these basic formulas are subsumed by the macro field feature.
If this simplistic formula entry described here is inadequate,
use a macro field to provide a more complex default. See
the description of macro files below, and the manual page \fImacro\fP(5).
.sp 1
In the case of a 
.I link
field, the default input is specialized to handle a link address.
Link addresses contain four parts or components, with
each component separated by an exclamation point.
.sp 1
An entire link address looks something like
.ti 9
.ft CW
local-field!link-index!link-dbase!far-field
.ft
.br
where \fIlocal-field\fP is in the current database,
\fIlink-index\fP and \fIlink-dbase\fP are an actual \fIFirstBase\fP
index/database pair, and the \fIfar-field\fP is in the \fIlink-dbase\fP.
The following is a list of each component and its meaning:
.br
.RS 8
.TP 12
.B local-field
The first link address component is a field name that designates a Link 
Cross Reference Field Value, a field
from the current database that 
will be used to locate the linked 
record in the \fIfar\fP (linked) database.
.TP 12
.B link-index
The \fIfar\fP index that is searched to 
locate the value indicated by the Link 
Cross Reference Field Value.
.TP 12
.B link-dbase
The database where the actual linked 
record exists. The record number found in 
the link-index is used to extract a record 
from this \fIfar\fP database.
.TP 12
.B far-field
The last link address component is a field name that designates the actual 
Link Field Value from 
the \fIfar\fP database. This field name
points to the field that will be 
available in the current database, but
is actually stored in the \fIfar\fP (link) database.
.br
.RE 8
'	# need to reset the outside layer for note. use 'blank' label.
.TP 8
\
\
.br
.sp 1
There is also a link method that allows pointing to absolute records.
In this case, although a link-index value is listed in the link formula,
the link index is ignored, and the absolute record number indicated is
used as the link record.
.sp 1
The entire link address using this feature looks like
.ti 9
.ft CW
R@local-field!link-index!link-dbase!far-field
.ft
.br
where \fBR\fP
is the absolute record number of the link record. Note that these link
values will appear on \fIdbedit\fP(1) and \fIdbvedit\fP(1) screen pages even
in Command Level.
.sp 1
.TP 8
.B comment
words or characters that can appear on the screen with the field whenever that
field is edited (using \fIdbedit\fP(1)).
Note: the length of a comment plus the
length of the corresponding field must fit into the \fIdbedit\fP(1) display
window (50 characters wide). Comments have no meaning for
fields larger than this window size.
.TP 8
.B comment location
specifies whether user defined screen comment appears (b)efore or (a)fter the
edit-field space.
.TP 8
.B lock
allows locking of a field. If set to y(es), the field may not be edited
after initial input. Otherwise, it is set to n(o).
.TP 8
.B help
allows the specification of a file that is bound to that field. The
contents of this file are available to the user in many programs 
through the ?N help
mechanism where N represents the number of the field. \fIDbedit\fP(1)
also allows
this file to be displayed upon receiving the standard help signal
(<CTL>-H) during the input process for that field.
.TP 8
.B choice
allows the specification of a file that will be used as the choice input
definitions for a field in the database. Note that if there is a choice 
file, the only way to tie in a different helpfile is by using the
\fB$HELP\fP directive \fIwithin\fP the actual choicefile.
.sp 1
The choice file is only allowed for a field defined to be of type choice. 
See \fIchoice\fP(5) for a definition of the choice file layout.
In addition, the AddChoice option flag  can be set so users can add
new selections to a choicefile (for future use).
.TP 8
.B extended choice
allows the specification of a file that will be used as the extended
choice file, a dictionary file of sorts that is used during extended
choice selections.
Note that if there is an extended choice 
file, there is no help nor choice file.
The extended choice file is only allowed for a field
defined to be of type extended choice. 
See \fIxchoice\fP(5) for a definition of the extended choice file layout.
.TP 8
.B autoindex
indicates to \fIFirstBase\fP that an index for this field is to be
maintained by dbedit. The index name must be unique among the other
autoindex names, and will only be used
for tracking all of the entries in the database by the indicated
field. This means that
all aspects of index maintenance can be automated for this index.
.sp 1
An autoindex can also be defined to only allow unique entries into the
field during use of \fIdbedit\fP(1). For example, if a field for an 
account number was being autoindexed with the unique entry option set,
then you could not enter two account number 101's into the dbase.
.sp 1
NOTE: A better method for defining autoindex fields is available using
a *.auto file. See \fIautoindex\fP(5).
.TP 8
.B range
allows the specification of a valid range for fields values.
All ranges are of the form 'xxx-yyy' where xxx is the low end of the
range and yyy is the high end.
Ranges work with any field, but date fields must define the range
using YYMMDD format.
.sp 1
Ranges can also be defined using comma separated fields of accepted values.
In other words, the range 'y,n' will only accept a 'y' or an 'n'.
Any number of comma separated values can be used.
.TP 8
.B macro
allows the specification of a macro file that will be used in place of the
normal editing of this field during the use of the database editor
\fIdbvedit\fP(1). (Again: this works for \fIdbvedit\fP(1) only!)
.sp 1
The macro file specified can assign a default string or value
to the field, or can provide the entrance to conditional editing of
other fields. The contents of the current record can be tested,
additional input can be requested, or complex functions can be generated.
.sp 1
A full description of macro files is in \fImacro\fP(5).
.PP
Per normal \fIFirstBase\fP programs, the user is given a chance to change and
modify
data on the screen via the standard 'any change' screen. This prompt
is displayed at the bottom of the screen and the program awaits
interactive commands.
The following is a list of valid 
\fIdbdbas\fP(1)
commands:
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-H
displays a summary of these commands.
.TP 7
.B ?[dfhiN]
displays help on the database, formulas,
user defined help files, index,
or field N.
.TP 7
.B <RETURN>
(return, or enter) pages forward one page in the database
dictionary.
Wrapping occurs at end of file.
.TP 7
.B @
go into auto add mode. Note that once a database has data in it,
only Formula and Link type fields can be added.
.TP 7
.B #
allow changes to line number #.
.TP 7
.B -
standard END key \(em exits program and keeps all changes.
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-X
aborts the program. The effect is to exit without
overwriting the file, meaning all modifications are lost.
.TP 7
.B b
pages backward one page in the database dictionary. 
Wrapping occurs at beginning of file.
.TP 7
.B d
delete function. Allows deletion of a single dictionary entry.
All entries below deleted entry slide up one slot.
.TP 7
.B i
insert function. Inserts a standard dictionary entry before any given
field.
All entries below inserted entry slide down one slot.
.PP
\fBNOTE:\fP in the \fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary some
file names are used to specify other data objects: helpfiles, choicefiles,
auto indexes, and database link files. When a \fIFirstBase\fP tool is invoked,
if the working database is in 
a different directory, these file names are expanded to reflect the working
directory. File names beginning with a dot (.) or a slash (/) will not be
expanded.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of \fIFirstBase\fP database
.TP 10
*.ddict
dictionary for database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbedit(1), dbcgen(1), choice(5), ddict(5),
defaults(5), input(5), macro(5), screens(5),
setup(5), xchoice(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbdbas\fP(1) will not allow structure
modifications to a dictionary file if a database for that
dictionary exists in the working directory. Modifications of
defaults, index names, etc. are allowed whenever desired.
.br
