.TH DBDLBL 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbdlbl \- define a \fIFirstBase\fP label dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbdlbl
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbdlbl
allows definition and modification of a 
.I FirstBase 
label dictionary via a screen oriented editor.
The label dictionary created
is later used by 
\fIdblgen\fP(1)
to create a ready to spool print image file of the labels.
.PP
A label dictionary consists of valid database field_names
and other characters or words
plugged into slots of a 5 line label template. 
.PP
The user has free choice of design of the label, meaning any of the 
label's five lines can be used for any purpose.
Oftentimes, a certain line is chosen to be the
.I name_line
of the label and another for the 
.I address_line,
etc, all the way down to the zip code.
A
.I header_line
can also be specified to print at the top of each label.
.PP
.B Note:
it is not necessary to use 
\fIdbdlbl\fP(1) 
and
\fIdblgen\fP(1)
strictly for mailing labels. Another idea is to use these programs to
generate name tags or badges for conferences or meetings.
.PP
When creating a new label, \fIdbdlbl\fP(1) starts up in a forced automatic
add mode, with line one (1) being the starting point. The standard end key
signal can be used at this point to escape from this forced mode to
the 'any change' screen.
The header line, line zero (0), is not input
through this forced input mode.
.PP
All lines of the label consists of words.  More than one word may appear
on each line.
If a word is a valid 
.I field_name
from the current database dictionary, then it is accepted with 
no messages. 
.PP
If however, the word is not defined as a field_name in the dictionary, 
the user is notified that the line contains at least one undefined symbol
by a message displayed next to the label line.
The undefined symbol is also marked by a 
.I '^'
printed below the first character in the symbol.
.PP
During the course of label generation, the defined words from the label
template created using
\fIdbdlbl\fP(1)
are replaced with their database values.
Undefined symbols are output exactly as seen.
Note that long symbols are silently
truncated to fit into a database fieldname descriptor.
.B Note:
All white space is left intact, although entire lines that are
blank after any substitutions in the label generator phase are
collapsed out of the label.
.PP
Optionally, a file name to store the print image of the labels can be
input, as well as the number of labels across the top (1-4 up), the
size in characters per label, and whether or not to left justify the
header line (line 0).
.PP
A list of simple editor commands appears on the 24th line of the 
screen at all times, with the standard help signal (<CTL>-H) displaying a
small summary of the possible commands.
The following is a list of valid 
\fIdbdlbl\fP(1) commands:
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-H
displays a summary of these commands.
.TP 7
.B ?[dfhiN]
displays help on the database, formulas,
user defined help files, index, or field N.
.TP 7
.B #
allow changes to line #.
.TP 7
.B -
standard END key \(em exits program and keeps all changes.
.TP 7
.B <CTL-X> 
aborts the program. The effect is to exit without
overwriting the file, meaning all changes are lost.
.PP
Upon successful completion of a label dictionary, the user is given a
chance to run the label generator. All arguments given
to \fIdbdlbl\fP(1) are passed on to \fIdblgen\fP(1).
The processes are overlaid,
meaning no new shells are generated in using this option.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
cdblbl
default name for \fIFirstBase\fP labels.
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
index
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.idictl
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP labels.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.lbl
\fIFirstBase\fP label print image file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dblgen(1), input(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbdlbl\fP(1)
will allow modification to any label dictionary file at any time. These
label dictionary files should thus be write protected if they are not to be
changed.
.PP
The defaults for the various optional fields reflect 4 up labels printed
using 12 cpi (pitch) on 54 character wide labels.
.br
