.TH DBDPRT 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbdprt \- define a \fIFirstBase\fP printout dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbdprt
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbdprt
allows definition and modification of a 
.I FirstBase 
printout dictionary via a screen oriented editor.
The printout dictionary created
is later used by 
\fIdbpgen\fP(1)
to create a ready to spool print image file of the report.
.PP
A printout dictionary consists of a list of valid database field names.
The field names in the list can appear in any order
and may appear more than once.
A title and file name to store the printout can also be
specified in the dictionary, along with the line spacing (single, double,
etc), the line length (columns per page), and a detail option.
.PP
Normally, field names are used to build selection criteria.
But, if the CHOOSEFIELD environment variable is ON, fields can be selected
from a list of numbered entries. See \fIsetup\fP(5).
.PP
For each numeric field listed, the user can decide whether to total the
field. Breaks can be defined for any field whether it is a totaled field or
not. A break will produce a physical spacing between sections of the
printout when the value of the field changes. Breaks are used to provide
subtotals of fields according to their content.
.PP
At all times, \fIdbdprt\fP(1) shows
how wide each field will be on the printout
and gives a running total of how long the current
print line up to and including that field will be.
.PP
This running line length total, 
labeled 'Line Length', is used to indicate when a single printline is
getting too long. The number in parenthesis indicates which line the field
will fall on (1 or 2), or that the printline is 'TOO LONG' at that point.
Such lines are silently  truncated during
printout generation (\fIdbpgen\fP(1)).
Two printlines per printout are allowed, and each
printline can be up to 500 characters long. 
.PP
Numeric, Floating,
and Dollar fields can be totaled for any printout. 
Multiple level breaks for any field may also be defined. A 
break on any level causes subtotals for that break level 
and all higher break levels subtotals
to be printed and cleared to zero (0)
when that field changes values.
.PP
Simple breaks are also supported. These simple breaks will not display
the value that was 'broken' on like a normal break, but will instead just
provide a single blank line as the 'break', along with any totals requested.
.PP
For true floating and formula fields, the decimals for each value
will usually not line up if printed as is, unless you have been very
careful on user input. To make the decimals on these fields
line up properly, provide a precision to the default area for the given
field in the database dictionary.
This precision is provided by using the colon (:) as described
under the formula section of \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
.PP
Like all other \fIFirstBase\fP dictionary editors, \fIdbdprt\fP(1) has a set
of commands
that allow screen oriented modification of the printout dictionary.
The following is a summary of the commands accepted by 
\fIdbdprt\fP(1):
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-H
displays a summary of these commands.
.TP 7
.B ?[dfhiN]
displays help on the database, formulas,
user defined help files, index, or field N.
.TP 7
.B <RETURN>
(return, or enter) pages forward one page in the database
dictionary (same as 'f')..
Wrapping occurs at end of file.
.TP 7
.B @
go into auto add mode.
.TP 7
.B #
allow changes to line number #.
.TP 7
.B -
standard END key \(em exits program and keeps all changes.
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-X
aborts the program. The effect is to exit without
overwriting the file, meaning all changes are lost.
.TP 7
.B b
pages backward one page in the database printout dictionary. 
Wrapping occurs at beginning of file.
.TP 7
.B d
delete function. Allows deletion of a single dictionary entry.
All entries below deleted entry slide up one slot.
.TP 7
.B i
insert function. Inserts a standard dictionary entry before any given
field.
All entries below inserted entry slide down one slot.
.TP 7
.B m
miscellaneous information screen. Changes can be made to the printout
title, the output file name, the line spacing, the columns per line,
and the option indicating whether to print 'all detail' or 'no detail'.
The defaults for these are '<EMPTY>', 'cdbprt', 1, 80, 
and 'all detail' respectively.
This screen is jumped to on the way out of \fIdbdprt\fP(1) automatically.
.sp 1
The options 'all detail' and 'no detail' refer to the amount of actual lines
that will be printed in the report. With 'all detail' on, each line of the
report will be printed. However, with 'no detail' set, only subtotals and
totals lines will be printed. This data suppression can be used with breaks and
and totals to generate summary reports.
.PP
Interactive error checking is done to assure that all fields entered exist
in the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
A list of simple editor commands
appears on the 24th line of the 
screen at all times, with a complete summary only a help signal (<CTL>-H)
away.
.PP
Upon successful completion of a printout dictionary, the user is given a
chance to run the printout generator. All arguments given
to \fIdbdprt\fP(1) are passed on to \fIdbpgen\fP(1).
The processes are overlaid,
meaning no new shells are generated in using this option.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
index
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
cdbprt
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP print image file.
.TP 10
*.idictp
dictionary for a \fIFirstBase\fP printout.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.prt
a \fIFirstBase\fP print image file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbpgen(1), firstbase(5), input(5), setup(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbdprt\fP(1)
will allow modification to any printout dictionary file at any time. These
printout dictionary files should thus be write protected if they are not to be
changed.
.br
