.TH DBDSCR 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbdscr \- define a \fIFirstBase\fP database screen dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbdscr
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-s\fP \fIscreen\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbdscr
allows definition and modification of a 
.I FirstBase
database screen dictionary. 
The created dictionary can later be used by
\fIdbedit\fP(1)
to effectively mask off and/or reorder the fields of a database.
In other words, a screen dictionary can be used to provide a logical
to physical map for the database fields.
.PP
A database screen dictionary consists of 
a series of screen descriptors. Each screen descriptor 
contains a
.I field_name,
and an optional
.I default-string.
.PP
Like all other \fIFirstBase\fP dictionary editors, \fIdbdscr\fP(1) has a set of commands
that allow screen oriented modification of the screen dictionary.
The following is a summary of the commands accepted by 
\fIdbdscr\fP(1):
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-H
displays a summary of these commands.
.TP 7
.B ?[dfhiN]
displays help on the database, formulas,
user defined help files, index, or field N.
.TP 7
.B <RETURN>
(return, or enter) pages forward one page in the database
dictionary (same as 'f').
Wrapping occurs at end of file.
.TP 7
.B @
go into auto add mode.
.TP 7
.B #
allow changes to line number #.
.TP 7
.B -
standard END key \(em exits program and keeps all changes.
.TP 7
.B <CTL>-X
aborts the program. The effect is to exit without
overwriting the file, meaning all changes are lost.
.TP 7
.B b
pages backward one page in the database screen dictionary. 
Wrapping occurs at beginning of file.
.TP 7
.B d
delete function. Allows deletion of a single dictionary entry.
All entries below deleted entry slide up one slot.
.TP 7
.B i
insert function. Inserts a standard dictionary entry before any given
field.
All entries below inserted entry slide down one slot.
.PP
A list of simple editor commands appears on the 24th line of the 
screen at all times, with help available by using the standard help 
signal (<CTL>-H).
Complete interactive error checking is done on the contents of
all screen descriptors.
.PP
Upon successful completion of a screen dictionary, the user is given a
chance to run the database editor. All arguments given
to \fIdbdscr\fP(1) are passed on to \fIdbedit\fP(1).
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the database screen
.TP 10
*.sdict
dictionary for database screen.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbedit(1), dbdbas(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbdscr\fP(1)
will allow editing and modifying of any screen dictionary at any time.
These dictionary files should be write protected for complete protection.
.br
