.TH DBEMIT 1 " 4 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbemit \- emit a \fIFirstBase\fP database in comma separated format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbemit
[\fB-b\fP]
[\fB-c\fP \fIchar_sep\fP] [\fB-f\fP] [\fB-q\fP] [\fB-s\fP] [\fIscreen\fP]
[\fB-t\fP] [\fB-v\fP] [\fB-y\fP] [\fB-B\fP] [\fB-\fP]
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbemit
emits all undeleted records of a \fIFirstBase\fP database in 
token separated format to an output file.
The set of processed records can be limited using the \fB-i\fP index specifier.
Each line contains one \fIFirstBase\fP record, with some token character
separating the fields. The default token is a comma.
.PP
The output file is the database name with a
.I .emit
extension. Creation of this output file can be overridden by using 
the \fB-\fP flag. This option will cause the output of the emit process to
go to standard output \(em most often the terminal.
.PP
Normally, 
\fIdbemit\fP(1) 
does not emit formula fields. However, using the 
.B -f
flag forces formula fields to be emitted along with real fields.
These formula emissions are calculated as they are being emitted.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell
scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without pausing
for the users permission to continue.
.PP
The \fB-B\fP flag will enable the fastest throughput of
records from the database. If this flag can be used, the \fIdbemit\fP
generation is speeded up a great deal by internal record buffering.
Note that no index can be used with record buffering, and
that record locking is disabled.
.PP
\fIDbemit\fP(1)
normally prints most all data as it is stored in the database.
However, alpha fields will be quoted if the \fB-q\fP flag is used,
and date and dollar fields will be formatted using the \fB-v\fP flag.
Note that for alphanumeric
data, embedded quotes ('"') and backslashes (\\) are escaped using the
standard C and UNIX method of preceding the character with a 
backslash.
.PP
\fIDbemit\fP(1)
provides a convenient method of producing a 
database image file that can be
directly downloaded into 
a different database management system.
The 'comma separated field'
format is compatible with many other database
management packages.
.PP
It is also possible to change the field separator used by dbemit. 
This is done using the \fB-c\fP flag.
As an example, the following command will emit data from the
database \fIphonelist\fP using the index \fIfriends\fP.
.sp 1
dbemit -d phonelist -i friends - -c :
.sp 1
Furthermore, this data will be emitted to standard output, and the field
separator will be a colon, not a comma.
.PP
As another example, \fB-c \\|\fP could be used to change the separator to
the vertical bar character ('|'). (Note the escaping of the pipeline
character due to the shell.)
.PP
By using the \fB-t\fP flag,
\fIdbemit\fP(1) will produce output that is ready to be
submitted to \fItbl\fP(1), the table production program that works in
conjunction with \fInroff\fP(1). This means that the following command
would produce a formatted report from a database using non-database,
standard UNIX tools to do the formatting:
.sp 1
dbemit -d phonelist -t - | tbl | nroff -me -Tlp
.sp 1
Note that the entire phonelist is printed here \(em not just an indexed
sub-section of the database.
A database \fIscreen\fP mask can also be applied to the dbemit
process (the \fB-s\fP flag) to reorder or ignore particular fields.
.PP
It is also possible to upload values 
into a \fIFirstBase\fP database file. See
\fIdbload\fP(1).
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.emit
extension for emitted databases.
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdbas(1), dbdscr(1), dbload(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
