.TH DBFILTER 1 " 3 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbfilter \- filter an existing \fIFirstBase\fP index into a
new \fIFirstBase\fP index
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbfilter
[\fB-b\fP]\ [\fB-y\fP]\
[\fB-s\fP]\ [\fB-a\fP]\
[\fB-d\fP\ \fIdatabase\fP]
[\fB-i\fP\ \fIindex\fP]
[\fB-c\fP\ \fIcolumns\fP]
[\fB-f\fP\ \fIfilter_index\fP]
[\fIfilter_file\fP | \fB-\fP ]
.PD
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbfilter
generates a distinct new index using an existing \fIindex\fP
and a \fIfilter_file\fP.
Each line of the \fIfilter_file\fP, a standard text file,
is looked up in the \fIindex\fP.
If the referenced index entry exists, it is written to the new
\fIfilter_index\fP. In other words, the \fIfilter_file\fP is used to filter
\fIindex\fP into \fIfilter_index\fP.
.PP
The result, \fIfilter_index\fP, is a complete \fIFirstBase\fP index.
(Note: since \fIdbigen\fP(1) is not used to generate \fIfilter_index\fP,
no \fI*.idicti\fP file is used). Error messages are generated for
each \fIfilter_file\fP request that cannot be referenced.
Using \fB-a\fP finds all occurrences of each filter line, and
\fB-s\fP sorts \fIfilter_index\fP after completion.
.PP
The \fB-c\fP switch allows setting the number of character columns or
positions that will be used to generate the index search key.
Normally, the width of the index indicates the number of character columns
required to match during the index lookup. The \fIfilter_file\fP can be
wider than this \(em only the first \fIcolumns\fP are used to reference the
indexed record. The \fIcolumns\fP can also be set to less than the width of
the index.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode,
suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed.
.PP
If the \fIfilter_file\fP specified is \fB-\fP, standard input (the keyboard)
is read, and batch mode (\fB-b\fP) is set. This works also when batch mode
is set, but no \fIfilter_file\fP is specified. For example the following
is valid:
.br
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
grep pattern text_file | dbfilter -d dbase -i index -f new -c 10 -b
.fi
.ad
.PP
Another interesting use of \fIdbfilter\fP can be achieved by generating
an index (\fIdbigen\fP(1)) and using \fIdbawk\fP(1), \fIdbemit\fP(1) or
\fIdbmerge\fP(1) to generate a \fIfilter_file\fP. This \fIfilter_file\fP
can then be edited or filtered using other Unix tools (\fIsed\fP(1),
\fIawk\fP(1), etc). The \fIfilter_file\fP is then used to generate
a new \fIFirstBase\fP index, usable with existing tools and scripts.
Remember to
make the first part of the \fIfilter_file\fP look like the first part of
the indexed field.
.PP
.I Dbfilter(1)
provides a convenient method of filtering an existing \fIFirstBase\fP index
into a new index that can then be used anywhere in the \fIFirstBase\fP system.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.TP 10
FILTER
default \fIfilter_file\fP.
.TP 10
filter
default \fIfilter_index\fP.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdind(1), dbigen(1), dbawk(1), dbemit(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbfilter\fP(1)
will ask permission before overwriting an existing \fIFirstBase\fP index
when not run in batch mode.
.br
