.TH DBJOIN 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbjoin \- join two \fIFirstBase\fP databases
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbjoin
[\fB-a\fP] [\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP] \fB-d\fP
\fIdbase1\fP \fB-i\fP \fIindex1\fP
[\fB-d2\fP \fIdbase2\fP] [\fB-i2\fP \fIindex2\fP] 
[\fB-o\fP \fIjoin_dbase\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbjoin
takes two \fIFirstBase\fP databases and joins the databases together
by laminating the records of each database into a single record.
These new records are written to a different output file, creating a
newly structured database.
.PP
Note: the use of dynamic links in the database dictionary can also be
used to get join type of information at runtime for each tool, instead of
using \fIdbjoin\fP to generate new databases. See \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
In addition, the \fIdbsql\fP tool can be used to do joins also.
.PP
The order in which records are laminated is determined by the
indexes associated with each database. Both indexes are required, and both
must be sorted.
Note that only the first indexed field of a multiple index is relevant
to any joining of database.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell
scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
The second database and its associated index are prompted for by 
\fIdbjoin\fP(1)
once the first database (\fIdbase1\fP) has been defined and loaded.
This second database (\fIdbase2\fP) and its index
must be distinct (different) from the first set.
.PP
After loading the second database, 
\fIdbjoin\fP(1)
asks for the name of an output file. This name must not be
either of the first two, but it can exist. Dbjoin(1) will deposit
the laminated (joined) records into a 
standard \fIFirstBase\fP database using this name as its base. Of course, a 
dictionary for the new database is also created.
.PP
Using the \fB-d2\fP and \fB-i2\fP
argument line flags, \fIdbjoin\fP(1) can be fed the
names of the second database and index from the command line.
The \fB-o\fP option allows specification of an output file from the command
line also.
.PP
As mentioned above, the  method used to join databases depends on
two separate, sorted \fIFirstBase\fP indexes that refer to two
separate \fIFirstBase\fP databases. Normally, \fIdbjoin\fP(1)
will output records only for those entries from both
indexes that match. These records take the form of the common indexed
field, followed by the fields from \fIdbase1\fP
then the fields from \fIdbase2\fP.
.PP
Index entries that do not match only create a record
if the
.B -a
option is specified. In this case, fields from the 'other' database
are left empty.
.PP
Again, note that only the first indexed field is tested for matching
during the joining phase. Multiple field indexes will work, but those
fields beyond the first are unused by \fIdbjoin\fP(1).
.PP
\fIDbjoin\fP(1)
allows an interesting tool oriented approach to data entry and database
management systems.
Combinations of databases can be created using this tool.
For example, personal and financial information for a group of people
could be joined together, edited all at once with
\fIdbedit\fP(1),
and then split back
into separate databases using 
\fIdbcgen\fP(1).
.PP
Note: \fIdbclean\fP(1)
is automatically run at the completion of this program to
create a map file for the new database.
.SH EXAMPLES
To run a simple interactive dbjoin, use
.sp 1
.ti +5
dbjoin -d j1 -i j1
.sp 1
To run this in yes mode providing the arguments it will need, use
.sp 1
.ti +5
dbjoin -y -d j1 -i j1 -d2 j2 -i2 j2 -o new_dbase
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index. 
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.TP 10
*.idict
index header information.
.TP 10
dbase
default database for dbjoin(1) and for prompted database name.
.TP 10
index
default index for dbjoin(1) and for prompted index name.
.TP 10
join
default name for join output file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbcat(1), dbcgen(1), dbdbas(1), dbedit(1), dbsql(1), firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbjoin\fP(1)
will ask permission before 
overwriting an existing output file.
.sp 1
Field names between the two databases must be unique, except for the
indexed field from each database. This is because the original
field names are used
in the resulting database, and any \fIFirstBase\fP database enforces unique
naming among its field names.
.sp 1
This tool uses \fIFirstBase\fP indexes to generate the output from the
databases in a particular order.
If either index is detected to be out of date or non-existent, it is
regenerated \fIautomatically\fP. An index is out of date if 
either the database or the index dictionary have been changed more
recently than the index was generated.
.br
