.TH DBLOAD 1 " 4 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbload, dbrload \- load comma separated values into a \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbload
[\fB-b\fP]\ [\fB-y\fP]\ [\fB-a\fP] [\fB-l\fP]
[\fB-d\fP\ \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-c\fP\ \fIseparator\fP]
[\fIloadfile\fP]
.br
.B dbrload
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP]
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP]
[\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
[\fB-c\fP \fIseparator\fP]
[\fIloadfile\fP]
.PD
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbload
reads comma separated values from 
.I loadfile
and builds a \fIFirstBase\fP database
using the values for fields. Each line of the input is assumed to be one
record. A valid \fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary is required.
.PP
\fIDbload\fP(1) can also be used with an existing database. Using the
\fB-a\fP option will cause \fIdbload\fP(1) to append records from the
loadfile to the database. The database map is also updated, so use of
\fIdbclean\fP(1) is not required. To enforce field length checking,
use the \fB-l\fP option.
.PP
.I Dbrload
is similar to dbload, except that database records are replaced (updated)
in an already existing database. To use \fIdbrload\fP(1), at least the
database must exist already. For each line of the loadfile,
\fIdbrload\fP(1) will
determine if the record already exists by consulting the given index,
which must be a FirstBase autoindex.
.PP
If the record exists, all non blank fields from the loadfile
are written to the existing database record.
To force the clearing of a field, use \fB$ERASE\fP as the field value.
If the record does not exist, or if no index is given for \fIdbrload\fP(1)
to search, a new record is appended to the end of the database.
Again: without an index, \fIdbrload\fP(1) will append
all records from the loadfile as if they were new.
.PP
To work properly on repeated duplicate records in the load file,
\fIdbrload\fP(1) must update the
given index as it adds new records to the database.
The best use of this feature is with \fIFirstBase\fP Btree indexes
which retain their order during record insertions.
.PP
Note that \fIdbrload\fP(1) will work on complex indexes \(em and the fields
that make up this index do not need to be in any specific order.
However, only one non-auto index will be updated by \fIdbrload\fP(1).
.PP
\fIDbrload\fP(1) also accepts the use of formulas for numeric fields.
These formulas have
the same basic format as those for \fIFirstBase\fP formula (virtual) fields
defined via \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
However, since the string passed in via dbrload could merely look like a
formula, a special mechanism is used to tell \fIdbrload\fP(1)
that the string is
to be parsed as a formula \(em all dbrload formulas must begin with "$F:".
.PP
.I Formulas 
use numbers to represent fields (eg. 16 for field 16)
and a prepended 'C' or 'c' for constants (eg. C4.5 for 4.5).
Addition 
.I (+), 
subtraction 
.I (-), 
multiplication 
.I (*), 
and division
.I (/)
are allowed as operators. 
.PP
.I Note:
Only dollar, float, numeric and positive numeric
fields can be used in formula
calculations. This means references to other formulas will not work.
Also, all formulas read from left to right, and there is no precedence
among the operators.
.PP
The precision of a formula is specified by appending a colon 
.I (:)
to the formula followed by a number.
Default precision is two.
.PP
For example, if the value of the third comma separated value of the rload
file is \fB$F:3+C22:0\fP,
then the contents of field three will be increased by
22 \(em with the result having 0 places after the decimal.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell
scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
If 
.I loadfile 
is not specified, the user is prompted for a
file name. The default is \fI*.emit\fP, where * is the database file name.
.I Note: 
normally, 
\fIdbload\fP(1) 
will 
.I not
add the extension \fI.emit\fP to the
.I loadfile.
.PP
If there are more fields defined in the dictionary than there are
values in any one input line, 
the excess fields are null padded. Excess values
not defined in the dictionary are ignored.
.PP
Although it is not necessary to put alphanumeric data in quotes, this will
not hinder dbload(1). Quotes must be used if the data includes
embedded commas. The backslash (\\)
is a metacharacter used to escape characters.
To embed a quotation mark, use '\\"', 
and to embed a backslash, '\\\\'.
.PP
.I Dbload(1)
provides a convenient method of uploading from one 
database management system into the
.I FirstBase
system. The 'comma separated field'
format is compatible with many other database
management packages.
It is also possible to emit values out of a \fIFirstBase\fP database file. See
\fIdbemit\fP(1).
.PP
The \fB-c\fP argument can be used to change the field separator to another
character. For example, \fB-c \\|\fP could be used to change the separator to
the vertical bar character ('|'). (Note the escaping of the pipeline
character due to the shell.)
.PP
Note: Unless \fB-a\fP was used, \fIdbclean\fP(1)
is automatically run at the completion of \fIdbload\fP(1) to
create a map file for the new database.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.TP 10
*.emit
\fIFirstBase\fP database emit file (dbemit(1)), defaulted to for dbload(1).
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbcat(1), dbdbas(1), dbemit(1), dbjoin(1), firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbload\fP(1)
will ask permission before overwriting an existing \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.sp 1
Note: \fIdbrload\fP(1) tool will attempt to gain write access to a record
before operating on that record. If access is currently locked, then the
internal locking routine will respond according to the value of
the \fIFirstBase\fP
environment variable LOCKMESSAGE. See \fIsetup\fP(5).
.sp
Each of these tools normally will ignore interrupt signals. However, if
the firstbase variable INTERRUPT is ON, these tools will terminate on
an interrupt signal.
However, if either of these database load tools is interrupted,
the database and index objects being updated should be deleted using
\fIrmdb\fP(8) and \fIrmidx\fP(8) before the database load is attempted again.
.br
