.TH DBMERGE 1 " 4 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbmerge \- merge source text with a \fIFirstBase\fP database (mail merge)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbmerge
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP] [\fB-B\fP]
[\fB-n\fP \fIcount\fP]
[\fB-w\fP \fIwidth\fP]
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP]
[\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
[\fIsource\fP]
[\fIdestination\fP | \fB-\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbmerge
merges a source document with user selected fields from a \fIFirstBase\fP
database.
The end result is a separate copy of the input document for each record
in the current \fIFirstBase\fP index with actual database data substituted for
in indicated places.
The set of processed records can be limited using the \fB-i\fP index specifier.
The \fB-n\fP flag can be used to process exactly \fIcount\fP records.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell
scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
The \fB-B\fP flag will enable the fastest throughput of records from the
database. If this flag can be used, the \fIdbmerge\fP generation
is speeded up a great deal by internal record buffering.
Note that no index can be used with record buffering, and
that record locking is disabled.
.PP
The \fB-w\fP flag is used to set the width of the document. Lines longer
than this width will be truncated with a warning.
The default width is the \fIFirstBase\fP environment variable \fIMERGECOLS\fP
or the minimum width of a \fIFirstBase\fP controlling terminal, 80.
.PP
If command line arguments for the source or destination are
not provided, dbmerge will prompt for
the
.I source 
and/or
.I destination
file names.
The destination file may be specified as \fB-\fP to produce output on the
standard output device.
.PP
To begin, a document must be prepared using some kind of
.I text editor,
or by using \fIdbdmrg\fP(1).
This document is the
.I source
to 
\fIdbmerge\fP(1).
One good example of 
\fIdbmerge\fP(1)
input is an
\fInroff\fP(1)
source document.
.PP
The input document may be interspersed with 
.I tokens
that represent data fields in a \fIFirstBase\fP database. These tokens are
formed by pre-pending a dollar sign, \fB$\fP,
to a valid \fIFirstBase\fP field_name.
For example, if 
.I LastName
is a valid database field name as defined in the current database
dictionary, then
.B $LastName
would be the correct token to insert into the document.
Again, this prepared document is the input or 
.I source
to
\fIdbmerge\fP(1).
.PP
Tokens can also be forced to appear in an expanded or truncated manner.
Each token can be followed by a size delimiter. For example,
\fB$LastName[25]\fP would print the LastName contents in a slot exactly
25 characters wide, no matter how big the actual data field is.
A size of 0 or no size means the field token data will print unconstrained.
.PP
\fIDbmerge\fP(1)
first parses the 
.I source
looking for tokens to be expanded.
During this stage, all found tokens are displayed on the screen.
Unresolved tokens are marked 
.I ...undefined. 
These undefined tokens are
printed out in place exactly as they appear.
Thus, '$100.00' would be marked as undefined, and would print '$100.00'.
Note: to get a single dollar sign without a warning, use two dollar signs ($$).
.PP
After getting the user's permission to continue, 
the processing stage takes the 
.I source 
document and produces one
copy for each record in the \fIFirstBase\fP index to the 
.I destination 
file.
Defined tokens are substituted for their respective field data from the
database during this stage.
.PP
.I Note:
white spaces (tabs, blanks, newlines) are kept intact during the actual
document-database merging.
Furthermore, it is up to the user to prepare the document properly.
For example, if the document is a letter, then probably a new page
is needed for each letter produced. For nroff source, this
means that a \fB.bp\fP command must be either the first or last nroff
command in the document.
.PP
The source document can also contain specific sections of text that are
processed exactly once: at the beginning or at the end of the
entire merge process. For example, this feature could be used to place
a header at the top of some merge output.
.PP
To use these features, the symbols \fB_BEGIN_\fP and \fB_END_\fP are used
to delimit sections of text to be processed at the beginning or at the end
of the merge process.
Both sections are optional, but if used,
should appear as in the following example:
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
_BEGIN_
...
[ Header information \(em printed exactly once ]
...
_BEGIN_
...
[ Normal Text ... with embedded $ Field Tokens ]
...
_END_
[ Footer information \(em printed exactly once ]
_END_
.ju
.fi
.sp 1
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
merge.in
default name for merge source file.
.TP 10
merge.out
default name for the merge output file.
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
index
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdmrg(1), dbedit(1), nroff(1), generators(5), firstbase(5), setup(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbmerge\fP(1)
pauses to ask permission to destroy an existing output
(\fIdestination\fP) file.
A valid \fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary is required for the current
database.
.sp 1
This tool uses a \fIFirstBase\fP index to generate the output from the
database in a particular order.
If this index is detected to be out of date or non-existent, it is
regenerated \fIautomatically\fP. An index is out of date if 
either the database or the index dictionary have changed more
recently than the index was generated.
.sp 1
This tool is line oriented and expects lines of 250 characters or less.
.br
