.TH DBPACK 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbpack \- remove deleted records from a \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbpack
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP]
\fIdatabase\fP [\fIdatabase\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbpack
squeezes out all deleted records from a \fIFirstBase\fP database, leaving only the
pure, 'packed' database.
The packing is done in place.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
Before
\fIdbpack\fP(1)
begins, the user is given a chance to abort.
.PP
.I Note:
packing a
.I FirstBase
database makes all indexes for that database obsolete and unusable.
Thus all indexes for that database must be regenerated after packing.
.PP
\fIDbclean\fP(1)
is automatically run at the completion of the packing process to
create a map file for the newly packed database.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbclean(1), dbedit(1), dbigen(1), dbregen(1), firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbpack\fP(1)
requires a database dictionary and a database. No indexes are used.
All records are processed in database sequential order.
Dbpack will noisily do nothing if there is no work to do (i.e. no
deletions).
.sp 1
Also, \fIdbpack\fP(1) needs to be run in the same directory as the
database (or at least on the same logical device) as temporary storage is
used in the current working directory to build the new database.
.br
