.TH DBPGEN 1 " 4 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbpgen \- generate a \fIFirstBase\fP printout
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbpgen
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP] [\fB-\fP]
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
[\fB-p\fP \fIpage_length\fP] [ \fB-f\fP ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbpgen
generates a \fIFirstBase\fP printout using a 
\fIFirstBase\fP printout dictionary defined via 
\fIdbdprt\fP(1).
This printout dictionary is used to determine which fields are to appear on
the printout.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell
scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
\fIDbpgen\fP(1)
first displays an image of what the printout will look like and where the
print image file will go. The user has a chance to abort here.
.PP
In the generated printout, 
the fields are listed in the order they appear in the dictionary.
Printouts can be oriented towards any page 
width (up to 500 columns), and with any line spacing 
(double, single, etc). See 
.I dbdprt(1).
.PP
The \fB-p\fP flag is used to control the page length, the actual length of
the form to be printed on, and can be used to override the 24 line
setting that the \fB-\fP uses. The default page length is 66 lines. 
Also, the \fB-f\fP
is used to make \fIdbpgen\fP use formfeeds between pages instead of blank
lines.
.PP
With the use of the \fB-\fP flag, all output is sent to standard output.
Otherwise, the output is written to the file indicated by the printout
dictionary.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
index
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.idictp
dictionary for printout generator.
.TP 10
*.prt
print image file produced by dbpgen(1).
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbedit(1), dbdprt(1), generators(5), firstbase(5), printouts(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If the output print image file already exists 
.I Dbpgen(1)
will pause and ask permission to overwrite it.
.sp 1
If a line gets too long, it is wrapped to the next line, and a
continuation flag, '@', is prepended to that line.
.sp 1
\fIDbpgen\fP(1) will silently truncate a print request list that would create
more than two print lines for a single record.
.sp 1
This tool uses a \fIFirstBase\fP index to generate the output from the database
in a particular order.
If this index is detected to be out of date or non-existent, it is
regenerated \fIautomatically\fP. An index is out of date if 
either the database or the index dictionary have changed more
recently than the index was generated.
.PP
In normal interactive mode, \fIdbpgen\fP(1) catches all interrupt signals.
However, when generating output to standard output or when running in 
batch mode, \fIdbpgen\fP(1)
will permit the interrupt signal to halt the process.
.br
