.TH DBRESTOR 8 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
DBRESTOR \- restore a \fIFirstBase\fP database from disk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B DBRESTOR
.I database
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I DBRESTOR
is a shell script that will restore a "dirty" database using the
previously dumped database and the current database log file.
.PP
The concept is as follows: the dumped database and its map are copied from
the \fIdbase.BKfirstbase\fP
and \fIdbase.BKmap\fP files back to the live files \fIdbase.cdb\fP
and \fIdbase.map\fP. Then, the \fIdbrestor\fP(8)
tool will use the database log,
\fIdbase.log\fP,
and recover the database almost to the point where the failure occurred.
.PP
Note: it is very important that the backed up database and its map are
kept intact before using the \fIdbrestor\fP(8) script. This is due to the fact
the the database log is kept using \fIlogical\fP record numbers.
\fIDbclean\fP(1) would change these record numbers \(em thus causing havoc and
destruction during the \fIdbrestor\fP(8) process.
.PP
\fIDbrestor\fP(8)
will run \fIdbclean\fP(1) on the restored database once
it has completed. This is used to determine accurate counts of valid
and deleted records.
.PP
This script could easily be changed to use tape backups if desired.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.log
\fIFirstBase\fP database log.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.BKfirstbase
dumped \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.BKmap
dumped map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
cp(1), firstbase(5), dictionaries(5), dbdump(8)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
