.TH DBSHELLTOOL 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbshelltool \- the \fIFirstBase\fP window shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbshelltool_OL
[\fItool\fP] [\fItool\fP \fIarguments\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbshelltool
is the
.I FirstBase
OpenLook interface to the \fItool\fP selected.
If no \fItool\fP is used, \fIdbshell\fP(1) is used on the \fIFirstBase\fP
MAIN menu.
.PP
The interface provided by \fIdbshelltool\fP consists of two parts \(em a button
panel and a standard tty subwindow. The indicated \fItool\fP,
usually a formal \fIFirstBase\fP tool,
is run in the tty subwindow. A button panel
of mouse selectable signals are placed beside the running \fItool\fP.
.PP
During the running of many of the actual \fIFirstBase\fP tools, like
\fIdbshell\fP(1) and \fIdbvedit\fP(1), the mouse can be used to select
actions from the tty subwindow. However, the actual focus of the
\fIdbshelltool\fP interface is never forced to either the mouse or keyboard --
both are available at all times.
.PP
As a \fIFirstBase\fP tool is executing underneath \fIdbshelltool\fP(1),
the button panel
will dynamically change to display only those commands that are proper
at the moment. Of course, the tools running under the tty subwindow can be
used without any of the command buttons.
.PP
\fIDbshelltool\fP(1) will display a header denoting the
actual \fIFirstBase\fP tool
running in the tty subwindow, as well as a context sensitive footer that
changes with the states of the underlying tool. This footer provides
the user with a message about what the mouse can select at that point.
.SH OPEN LOOK ACCELERATORS
The following is a list of the places within the FirstBase that
additional Open Look accelerators have been added:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP 13
\fIdbshell\fP(1)
mouse selectable menu commands.
\fINote\fP: the selectable
actions must use the reverse video mechanism as outlined in \fIdbshell\fP(1).
.TP 13
\fIdbedit\fP(1), \fIdbvedit\fP(1), \fIdbvemit\fP(1)
mouse selectable fields to edit, choice fields,
nested choices, and extended choices.
An additional button command provides a standard OpenLook menu.
.TP 13
\fIscrprint\fP(1)
mouse selectable commands from the menu.
.PD
.SH USAGE
\fIDbshelltool\fP(1) can be run in a number of ways, including the background.
Here are a few simple examples:
.br
.nf
.nj
.sp 1
.ft CW
   dbshelltool
   dbshelltool &
   dbshelltool dbshell menu/MAIN
   dbshelltool dbvedit -d dbase -i index -v view &
   dbshelltool fblogin
.ft
.sp 1
.fi
.ju
.PP
Additionally, OpenLook command line arguments, such as those that
control background colors, can be given to
\fIdbshelltool_OL\fP. However, these command line arguments must use the
short flag name, denoted by \fB-W\fP style arguments, and these arguments
must be placed at the end of the list of arguments.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbshelltool\fP(1) requires an Open Look (or X11) window manager.
Formally, \fIdbshelltool_OL\fP is the Open Look version.
.br
