.TH DBSHELL 1 "21 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
Dbshell \- the \fIFirstBase\fP menu tool.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbshell
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
[\fB-s\fP \fIscreen\fP]
[\fB-v\fP \fIview\fP]
[\fImenu\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbshell
is the database menu shell tool which provides all of the flexibility
of the Bourne shell along with the power and ease of use that menus create.
Like other \fIFirstBase\fP tools, \fIdbshell\fP(1) works from a
menu dictionary \(em sort of.
.PP
The dbshell dictionary is more of a free form
text file created with your favorite editor (like \fIvi\fP(1)).
This file will be 'executed' by \fIdbshell\fP(1), allowing a smooth
interface between menu selections and the Bourne shell.
.PP
Using this dictionary,
\fIdbshell\fP(1) paints the screen and then provides a prompt for user input.
At this prompt, the user
issues commands. The command must be known by \fIdbshell\fP(1) or have been
built into the dictionary being executed.
\fIDbshell\fP(1) has a few built in commands. These are summarized in the
COMMANDS section below.
.PP
The default menu for \fIdbshell\fP(1) is \fImenu/MAIN\fP located in the
\fIfirstbase\fP home directory.
.PP
To execute a command, the entire selection does not need to typed \(em
just enough to distinguish it from other commands.
This feature can be disabled using the environment variable
MENUMATCH. See \fIsetup\fP(5) for more.
.PP
There are two major divisions to the dictionary/text file:
the \fIscreen\fP section and the \fIactions\fP section.
The \fIscreen\fP section of the dictionary file is all of the beginning
lines of the file, up to a line with a single percent sign.
A maximum of 21 lines are allowed.
.PP
This screen section will appear on the terminal \fIexactly\fP as depicted
in the file with one exception. To display
words or tokens in reverse video prepend a dollar sign (\fB$\fP) to the token.
A \fIdbshell\fP screen will have the
standard \fIFirstBase\fP header and footer lines, and
an "Enter Selection" prompt on the 24th line.
.PP
A token is defined as a series of
alphanumeric characters plus the underscore, or as punctuation. This means
characters like ampersand and comma must be marked individually.
Use an underscore to force reverse video of a blank.
For instance, in the example presented at the end of this section, the
areas 'Major Functions' and 'Minor Functions' will be displayed in reverse
video, as well as the '1' and the '2' (but not the periods).
.PP
The actions part of the dictionary/text file used with dbshell(1) consists
of simple shell commands or scripts
that are executed when their labels are selected. These commands
are located after the '%' marker in the file.
.PP
A label consists of a series of alphanumeric characters, with a dollar 
sign ('$') prepended to the label. In the example file presented, there are
five labels: $1, $2, $mail, $ls and $print. Each of the associated actions
connected to these labels will be executed as a shell script by the Bourne
shell.
.PP
So, an entry of '1' (and a <RETURN>) at the "Enter Selection: "
prompt would echo 'choice one' to the terminal. A '2' would change to
another directory and run the database editor. Etc.
.PP
There are three special flags that can be placed after a label. A 
negative one (-1),
as used in the '$ls' label, will cause dbshell(1) to NOT pause after returning
to the menu before the screen is redrawn.
.PP
The '*' flag is used to denote a sub menu dictionary/text file.
In this case, the sub menu is
selected by issuing the command 'print' (since it is tied to the $print
label). In the example, the actual menu file is \fIPRINT\fP.
Note that a full path name to \fIPRINT\fP is not needed as long as it
exists in the same directory as the calling menu. Thus,
systems of menus can be written using relative pathnames. Also, the menus can
be kept in one directory and invoked from another.
.PP
In this case, the initial command would be something like
.ft CW
dbshell menu_directory/MAIN.
.ft
This MAIN menu can then invoke the PRINT submenu as in the example below.
Again, \fIdbshell\fP will remember the \fImenu_directory\fP
of the first invoked menu. This directory name will be prepended to all
submenu names that are NOT full pathnames, i.e. that do not begin with a slash.
.PP
Optionally, after the '*', a directory name can be supplied. Using this
feature, \fIdbshell\fP(1) will change directories to the supplied place,
and then invoke the submenu. See the \fIwork\fP submenu choice below.
.PP
The optional working directory can also be a true UNIX environment
variable, prepended with a \fB$\fP like standard shell variable.
For example, if \fB$CTSHOME\fP was used, \fIdbshell\fP(1) will
substitute in the contents of the UNIX environment variable \fICTSHOME\fP.
.PP
The third special flag that can be placed after the label is the
meta command \fB$EXIT\fP. Furthermore, this line can contain a number
that will be used to exit, i.e. \fB$EXIT 31\fP would use the exit 
value \fI31\fP upon termination.
.PP
This special meta command will cause a forced exit from \fIdbshell\fP(1).
Any attached normal menu commands are executed before the exit takes place.
.SH COMMANDS
\fIDbshell\fP(1) has a few built in commands that are used from the command
line \(em the 'Enter Selection' prompt. These commands are summarized below.
.sp 1
.TP 10
.B cd
change directory. The user is asked for the name of the directory to
change to. If successful, the new directory name is displayed on the 
footer line. Otherwise an error message occurs.
.TP 10
.B <CTL>-E
This command displays the list of environment commands that can be used
to change various parts of the working environment. For example, you can
enter the names of the database and index, change working
directories, or even start a UNIX shell. See \fIChapter 3\fP of the
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
for a display of this screen. (Note that a <CTL>-D will
also work in place of <CTL>-E).
.TP 10
.B <CTL>-H
produce help screen. The help screens here are completely user defined.
\fIDbshell\fP(1) looks for a file with the same name as the menu, with an
extension of '.help', and pages this file to the screen. Help files can
be as long as needed.
.TP 10
.B -
Standard END keystroke. Ends from the current dictionary/menu. If this was
a sub menu, its parent is re-invoked. If this was the main menu (root
menu), the user will be asked 'Really Exit?'.
.TP 10
.B <CTL>-X
Abort from current menu.
The user will be asked 'Really Exit?'.
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is a very small sample dictionary/text file that could be used with
dbshell(1):
.nf
.nj
.na

      $Major_Functions       $Minor_Functions
      
       $1. Choice One           $mail - Send system mail
       $2. Edit Database        $ls   - list directory
       
                      $Sub_Menus
              $print - Printout Sub Menu
              $work  - Work Menu
              $quit  - Quit
%
$1
echo choice one

$2
cd /usr/databases/work
dbedit -d master -i coname -s invoice

$mail
echo -n "Send mail to who? "
read MAILTO
echo "Enter mail message now. End with a '.'."
mail $MAILTO

$ls -1
ls -F

$print *
PRINT

$work * /usr/work
WORK

$q $EXIT 0
echo Good Bye
.fi
.ju
.ad
.PP
Security Note: The standard locking method used to disable \fIdbedit\fP(1)
visual, filter and shell commands is implemented in \fIdbshell\fP(1) as
well. This disabling lock, \fI.cshell_lck\fP, must appear in either the
current directory or the system directory, \fI/usr/lib/firstbase\fP.
.PP
\fIDbshell\fP(1)
supports special meta-tokens that can be embedded within shell
actions. These tokens are listed below.
.sp 1
.TP 10
.B $FIRSTBASEHOME
appearing anywhere in the action
will be substituted at run time for the home directory of the firstbase system,
as defined by the UNIX environment variable of the same name.
.sp 1
This feature enables referencing of the \fIFirstBase\fP menu system from
within other application menu systems using 
.ft CW
$FIRSTBASEHOME/menu/MAIN
.ft
as the menu file referenced.
.TP 10
.B $DBASE
appearing anywhere in the action
will be substituted at run time for the argument line database.
.TP 10
.B $INDEX
appearing anywhere in the action
will be substituted at run time for the argument line index.
.TP 10
.B $SCREEN
appearing anywhere in the action
will be substituted at run time for the argument line screen.
.TP 10
.B $VIEW
appearing anywhere in the action
will be substituted at run time for the argument line view dictionary.
.TP 10
.B $RUNFLAGS
appearing anywhere in the action
will be substituted at run time for the environment variable string
defined for RUNFLAGS.
.PD
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
main
name of default dbshell menu file.
.TP 10
/tmp/FBEXE??????
Temporary location of shell scripts. Controlled by TEMPDIR, via \fIsetup\fP(5)
.TP 10
*.help
extension for menu help files.
.TP 10
 .cshell_lck
sub process lock.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbshelltool(1), firstbase(1), setup(5).
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
