.TH DBUGEN 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbugen \- generate updates within a \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbugen
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP]
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbugen
generates updates within a \fIFirstBase\fP database using an update
dictionary defined via 
\fIdbdupd\fP(1).
This update dictionary is used to determine 
the new value of each of the fields processed.
Fields not mentioned in the update dictionary are not modified.
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fI-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
.PP
\fIDbugen\fP(1)
first displays an image of the updates that will occur.
The user has a chance to abort here. All updates are done in place, 
directly into the current database.
.PP
\fIDbugen\fP(1)
can change selected fields of selected records on a global basis.
Any field can be cleared out, 
alphanumeric fields can be replaced, and numeric oriented
fields (numeric, float, 
dollar) can actually be formulated during updates.
See 
\fIdbdupd\fP(1)
for more update details.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
index
default name for the \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.?dict
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP dbase or index.
.TP 10
*.idictu
dictionary for update generator.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
\fIFirstBase\fP index.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdupd(1), dbdbas(1), dbedit(1), generators(5).
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
For those of you who are
more tool oriented, \fIdbdupd\fP(1) and \fIdbugen\fP(1) effectively
implement a macro processor, complete with argument macros, for the
\fIFirstBase\fP.
.sp 1
This tool uses a \fIFirstBase\fP index to process the database in a particular order.
If this index is detected to be out of date or non-existent, it is
regenerated \fIautomatically\fP.
.sp 1
Note: this \fIFirstBase\fP database tool will attempt to gain write access to a record
before operating on that record. If access is currently locked, then the
internal locking routine will respond according to the value of the \fIFirstBase\fP
environment variable LOCKMESSAGE. See \fIsetup\fP(5).
.br
