.TH DBUNDO 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbundo \- globally undo all deletions in a \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbundo
[\fB-b\fP] [\fB-y\fP] [\fB-f\fP]
\fIdatabase\fP [\fIdatabase\fP ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbundo
undeletes all deleted records in the named \fIFirstBase\fP database.
The result is a pure database with all records intact.
The undoing (undeleting) 
is done in place. 
.PP
The \fB-b\fP
flag will run the \fIFirstBase\fP tool in batch mode, suitable for shell scripts.
This mode produces no output on the terminal, thus can also be used
when running the process in the background.
The \fB-y\fP flag will run the tool at the terminal without pausing to ask
the user if existing files can be destroyed and without displaying
a 'picture' of the requested task.
..PP
Before
\fIdbundo\fP(1)
starts, the user is given a chance to abort.
.PP
.I Note:
indexes are not valid after use of 
\fIdbundo\fP(1)
since records that may not be in current indexes are restored.
See \fIdbregen\fP(1) for regenerating indexes easily.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbpack(1), dbedit(1), firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIDbundo\fP(1)
requires a database dictionary and a database.
.sp 1
All records are processed in database sequential order, and no indexes
are used.
.sp 1
\fIDbundo\fP will do nothing if there is no work to do (i.e. no
deletions). Of course, \fIdbundo\fP(1) cannot undo any database deletions
that have
already been packed using \fIdbpack\fP(1).
.br
