.TH DBVEMIT 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbvemit \- visual database emitter - dbvedit/dbemit fusion
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP 9
.B dbvemit
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP] [\fB-v\fP \fIview\fP]
[\fB-c\fP \fIchar_sep\fP] [\fB-q\fP] [\fB-bt\fP \fIbegintoken\fP]
.br
[\fB-et\fP \fIendtoken\fP]
[\fB-a\fP \fIcount\fP]
[\fIemitfile\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbvemit
is a functional equivalent of \fIdbvedit\fP(1), without the actual
reads and writes of records to a \fIFirstBase\fP database. \fIDbvemit\fP(1) allows
users to create records using the \fIdbvedit\fP(1) mechanism. But the
created records are stored in a \fIFirstBase\fP loadable file, \fInot\fP in an
actual database.
.PP
The resulting \fIemitfile\fP can be loaded directly into a \fIFirstBase\fP
database using either \fIdbload\fP(1) or \fIdbrload\fP(1).
.PP
Most all functionality of the database editor dbvedit(1) is available
from \fIdbvemit\fP(1). However, \fIdbvemit\fP(1) will \fBalways\fP run
in \fIadd\fP \fImode\fP, as if \fB-a\fP was used on \fIdbvedit\fP(1).
This means that once a record is created, it cannot be re-edited using
\fIdbvemit\fP(1).
.PP
Note that at least the database dictionary and database view files are
required to make \fIdbvemit\fP(1) work. Also, the resulting \fIemitfile\fP
will contain a slot for every field from the database, whether or not
the fields are \fIedited\fP from the view dictionary file.
.PP
The \fB-q\fP flag can be used to force non numeric fields to be emitted
within double quote marks. Also, the \fB-c\fP option can change the
default field separator, \fB|\fP.
.PP
Beginning and ending tokens can be used to separate the individual
"records" of the emitted file by using the \fB-bt\fP and \fB-et\fP flags.
In this case, each individual record will begin with the \fIbegintoken\fP
and a newline. Similarly, each record \(em after the normal newline
separator \(em will contain an \fIendtoken\fP and another newline.
.PP
The \fB-a\fP flag can be used to force exactly \fIcount\fP "records"
to be created before exiting.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.vemit
extension for emitted loadfiles.
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdbas(1), view(5), dbload(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
