.TH DBVFORM 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dbvform \- format a \fIFirstBase\fP database using standard view dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dbvform
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP] [\fB-v\fP \fIview\fP]
[\fB-f\fP] [\fB-B\fP]
[\fB-l\fP \fIpage-length\fP] [\fB-w\fP \fIpage-width\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dbvform
formats undeleted records of a \fIFirstBase\fP database using a standard
view dictionary as described in \fIview\fP(5). All output is written to 
standard output, usually the terminal.
.PP
A logical page is generated for each record of the database or index,
as well as for each page within the view dictionary, as denoted by the
$PAGE lines (\fIview\fP(5)).
.PP
Without an index, \fIdbvform\fP(1) will process the entire database.
Using an index, a very select portion of a database can be formatted.
.PP
The \fB-B\fP flag will enable the fastest throughput of
records from the database. If this flag can be used, the \fIdbvform\fP
generation is speeded up a great deal by internal record buffering.
Note that no index can be used with record buffering, and
that record locking is disabled.
.PP
The length and width of the output can be specified using the \fB-l\fP
and \fB-w\fP flags \(em with the default being 24 lines by 80 columns, and
the maximum being 66 lines by 132 columns.
.PP
Adjusting the page lengths and widths can create some very desirable
effects. For example, a page length of \fB1\fP (one) with a proper view
dictionary that maps a few fields to line one will create a tabular listing
of the specified data. Or, using a length and width of \fB9\fP
and \fB40\fP, badges or labels could be generated.
.PP
\fIDbvform\fP will normally generate \fIpage-length\fP lines for each
record processed, even if the lines
are empty. Using the \fB-f\fP flag will cause formfeeds to be used instead.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of database.
.TP 10
dbase
default name of view dictionary.
.TP 10
index
default name of index.
.TP 10
*.cdb
\fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
\fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary file.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbvedit(1), view(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
