.TH DEFAULTS 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
defaults \- \fIFirstBase\fP defaults
.SH SYNOPSIS
Discussion of \fIFirstBase\fP field defaults.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Field defaults within \fIFirstBase\fP are usually defined in the
database dictionary, and are set up using \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
However, some applications need separate default values depending on
site location or individual user.
.PP
To provide this flexibility, all \fIFirstBase\fP tools optionally read a
defaults file \fIafter\fP initializing the database. These extra defaults are
used to override defaults from the database dictionary.
.PP
This flexible defaults file is named \fI.dbase_rc\fP, where the
characters \fIdbase\fP represent the actual database name. The
file can appear anywhere in the users PATH \(em only the first one found is
processed.
.PP
For now, editing of the defaults file is done using any standard text
editor. The format is simple \(em each line represents one field.
(Though shown on two lines, each entry \fBmust\fP be a single line).
.nf
.nj
.sp 1
.ft CW
Field_Name [-d default] [-c[ab] comment] [-l]
   [-h helpfile] [-A] [-r range] [-m macro]
.ju
.fi
.PP
Note that all attributes from a database field can be modified except
field type and length. The ordering of these lines does not matter.
See \fIdbdbas\fP(1) and \fIddict\fP(5) for descriptions of these attributes.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
 \.dbase_rc
default name of \fIFirstBase\fP database defaults file
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbdbas(1), ddict(5), firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
