.TH DICTIONARIES 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
dictionaries \- \fIFirstBase\fP dictionaries
.SH SYNOPSIS
Brief discussion of internal \fIFirstBase\fP dictionaries.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The entire \fIFirstBase\fP system is dictionary driven. This means that each
tool's understanding of a data object
in the system depends on the contents of these dictionaries.
Thus, changing a dictionary is all that is needed to change the behavior
of the \fIFirstBase\fP tool.
Again, the dictionaries provide a soft mechanism for
structuring all data objects in the \fIFirstBase\fP system.
.PP
All dictionaries in the \fIFirstBase\fP system are represented as ascii files,
with the exception of the index header dictionary which has some binary
bytes of header information at the top. This means that most dictionaries
in the \fIFirstBase\fP system can be printed or edited using standard UNIX
tools.
.PP
While printing or catting a dictionary is fine, editing
of a dictionary using a UNIX tool, as opposed to the
provided \fIFirstBase\fP dictionary editors,
is quite dangerous if you do not know what you are doing. In general,
do not use a UNIX editor to edit a dictionary. Period.
.PP
Note that in all dictionaries, embedded blanks in the field
names or in defaults, etc, are replaced with an underscore.
.PP
The following is a list of dictionary files that the \fIFirstBase\fP system will
create and use for databases and data objects. Only the extensions are
listed here \(em the database and index names are presumably provided by the
user.
.sp 1
.PD 0
.TP 10
.I ddict
the database dictionary - lists all fields and all information for a
database, defaults, help files, choice files, locks, etc.
Most every tool in the \fIFirstBase\fP system reads this file to determine
the size and shape of the database. Created by using \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
.sp 1
Sometimes it is advantageous to have a single
database dictionary file in one directory, and the actual data files
in a different directory. To accomplish
this, all \fIFirstBase\fP tools will understand the \fB-dd\fP argument line
option which can be used as described. For example:
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
dbvedit -d dbase -dd /usr/lib/dict/data -i index
.sp 1
.fi
.ju
would invoke the database editor as if a \fIdbase.ddict\fP file existed in
the current directory. See \fIddict\fP(5) for a description of the database
dictionary layout.
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I sdict
the screen dictionary - lists all fields that will be displayed when using
the database editor \fIdbedit\fP(1). This dictionary provides the physical
to logical mapping of a database to a screen. If not present, the entire
ddict file is used. Created by using \fIdbdscr\fP(1).
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I vdict
the view dictionary - maps text and fields to the screen. For use only
with the visual database editor, \fIdbvedit\fP(1). These dictionaries are
created by using any standard text editor. See \fIview\fP(5) for more details.
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I idict
the index dictionary - lists all the fields in the applicable dictionary,
as well as stores the index record and organized counts.
This is the only dictionary file that contains non printable
ascii characters \(em the two needed index header numbers. The
record count and the organized record count numbers are stored as binary.
This dictionary type file is created by \fIdbigen\fP(1) itself \(em users never
interact with this file directly.
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I idicti
the index generator dictionary - lists all of the fields that the
index generator \fIdbigen\fP(1) will use when
making an index, as well as all of the selection criteria and the logical
connectors used to create selective indexes.
Created by \fIdbdind\fP(1). See \fIidicti\fP(5) for a description of the
index dictionary file layout.
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I idictp
the printout generator dictionary - lists all of the attributes that the
printout generator \fIdbpgen\fP(1) will use when creating a printout.
Created by \fIdbdprt\fP(1).
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I idictl
the label generator dictionary - lists all of the attributes that the
label generator \fIdblgen\fP(1) will use when creating a labels.
Created by \fIdbdlbl\fP(1).
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I idictc
the conversion generator dictionary - lists all of the attributes that the
conversion generator \fIdbcgen\fP(1)
will use when creating a converted database.
Created by \fIdbdcnv\fP(1).
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I idictu
the update generator dictionary - lists all of the attributes that the
update generator \fIdbugen\fP(1) will use when updating a \fIFirstBase\fP database.
Created by \fIdbdupd\fP(1).
.sp 1
.TP 10
.I auto
automatic index maintenance list. Created with any text editor.
See \fIautoindex\fP(5).
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
