.TH ERROR 5 " 2 May 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
error \- overview of \fIFirstBase\fP error numbers
.SH SYNOPSIS
Description of the \fIFirstBase\fP error numbers
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIFirstBase\fP editors, generators, and processing languages
will generate error messages when appropriate.
This list covers the standard set of error numbers, what they most likely
mean, and hints at how to fix the problem.
.PD 1
.TP 5
101
FB_BAD_TTY - Not connected to an interactive tty device.
.TP 5
102
FB_BAD_TERMCAP - Either the database of terminal capabilities itself or the
individual entry for the current terminal was not located. See
\fIterminals\fP(5).
.TP 5
121
FB_BAD_DATA - Corrupt data in the database or data object.
If the object is a database, use \fIdbcheck\fP(1) to verify database
corruption.
Use \fIdbclean\fP(1) or \fIdbemit\fP(1)/\fIdbload\fP(1) to repair a database.
.TP 5
122
FB_BAD_DICT - The database data dictionary is not valid. See \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
.TP 5
123
FB_BAD_INDEX - The index is either corrupt or for a different database.
Try \fIdbregen\fP(1) or \fIdbigen\fP(1) to regenerate the bad index.
.TP 5
124
FB_EXEC_FAILURE - An execution failure, probably too many processes
running on the computer.
.TP 5
125
FB_FATAL_FGETREC - A fatal fixed getrec call. \fIFgetrec\fP
is used to read the fixed length map records and index entries of the
database support files.
Use \fIdbcheck\fP(1) to see if the problem is with the database.
If so, use \fIdbclean\fP(1) or \fIdbemit\fP(1)/\fIdbload\fP(1) to repair
the database. Otherwise, rebuild the offending index using \fIdbigen\fP(1).
.TP 5
126
FB_FATAL_GETREC - A fatal getrec call. \fIGetrec\fP
is used to read records from the
database. Typically, this means the database map file is corrupt, though
the data itself could be.
Use \fIdbclean\fP(1) or \fIdbemit\fP(1)/\fIdbload\fP(1) to repair
the database.
.TP 5
127
FB_FATAL_PUTREC - A fatal putrec call. \fIPutrec\fP is used to write a
record to the database. If received while using a C program or
\fImacro\fP(5) code, check each field that is being stored or assigned.
This error could indicate a more serious hardware problem.
.TP 5
128
FB_IO_ERROR - A serious data error which could indicate a hardware problem.
An attempt to read or write from a file marked OK has resulted in an error.
One possibility might be the machine architecture, big endian or little endian.
See the FirstBase settings CPU_BYTEORDER and DBASE_BYTEORDER in \fIsetup\fP(5).
.TP 5
129
FB_OUT_OF_MEMORY - The process has run out of memory.
.TP 5
130
FB_READ_ERROR - The process could not read from a file.
.TP 5
131
FB_SEEK_ERROR - The process could not seek to a certain point of the
indicated file.
.TP 5
132
FB_WRITE_ERROR - The process could not write to the indicated file.
.TP 5
133
FB_WRONG_INDEX - The requested index is either from a different database
or from a different incarnation of the current database.
.TP 5
134
FB_DIRTY_DBASE - This error means that some process exited during a critical
section of updating a database record. If the occurs, all other processes
are locked out of the database since the data is most likely corrupt.
The fix is to use \fIdbclean\fP(1), and to determine why the initial process
exited during the critical database update section.
.TP 5
135
FB_LINK_ERROR - An error has occurred in a database linked to the current
database. The offending database must be fixed before the current one will
work.
.TP 5
200
FB_ABORT_ERROR - User entered ABORT keystroke to exit. See \fIkeyboard\fP(5).
.TP 5
201
FB_CANT_OPEN - The process cannot open the indicated file. The additional error
message should state the reason: permission denied, too many files, read
only disk partition, etc.
.TP 5
202
FB_CANT_CREATE - The process cannot create the indicated file. An additional
error message stating the reason is also printed.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
