.TH FBFIXED 8 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
fbfixed \- install a \fIFirstBase\fP Fixed CPU License
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fbfixed
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIFbfixed\fP is used to install new \fIFirstBase\fP fixed CPU licenses.
The tool is a full screen, interactive license editor, using the \fIFirstBase\fP
style of data input. There are five fields for input, each described below.
The file that the licenses are stored
in is \fI$FIRSTBASEHOME/.firstbase-license\fP
(or \fI.fb-license\fP or \fI.fb-lic\fP on some machines).
.PD 1
.TP 15
Local or Global
The first field controls the location of the license password file.
Global licenses are stored in the \fIFirstBase\fP home directory,
$FIRSTBASEHOME.
Local licenses are stored in the $HOME directory of the user.
.TP 15
Support Date
This date is assigned to the installation site by FirstBase Software.
It can be entered as MM-DD-YY, MMDDYY, or MM/DD/YY.
.TP 15
License Type
This field controls the classification of license provided by FirstBase
Software. There are four types of license, each selected by the first letter
of its name: Permanent, Secure, Temporary, and Limited.
.TP 15
Host ID
The Host ID from the installation CPU or HostID Device is stored here.
.TP 15
License Password
This field is the license password provided to the site by FirstBase Software.
.PD
.sp 1
.PP
After entering each of the fields, the new license will be merged with
the license file. Multiple licenses can be entered at the same time.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 15
 .firstbase-license \(em \fIFirstBase\fP fixed license file on BSD machines.
.TP 15
 .fb-license \(em \fIFirstBase\fP fixed license file on non BSD machines.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
dbshell(1), setup(8)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
