.TH FETCH 3 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
fetch \- fetch a field from the current record
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_fetch(f, s, db)
.br
fb_field *f;
.br
char *s;
.br
fb_database *db;
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the \fIdatabase\fP(4)
manual page, a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including an array of
field structures, all file names and descriptors, and index information.
Altogether, the array of field structures can hold one complete record.
.PP
These records are retrieved from the database file and stored into the
field structures using \fIgetrec\fP(3) or \fIgetxrec\fP(3).
Once a record has been
loaded into the field structures of database \fIdb\fP,
\fIfb_fetch\fP can be used to copy a field from field descriptor \fIf\fP to
a buffer \fIs\fP.
This allows \fIs\fP to be walked on without fear of disturbing any data.
.PP
If the application program is not designed to run as a client for
the \fIFirstBase\fP database server \fIfbserver\fP(8), then it is
not always necessary to use \fIfb_fetch\fP
since the field is readily available by accessing the
char pointer \fIfld\fP in field descriptor \fIf\fP (f->fld).
.PP
A macro in the \fIFirstBase\fP header file
called \fBFB_FLD(n, db)\fP will
produce field \fIn\fP from database \fIdb\fP as a char pointer
(as long as the application is \fBnot\fP based on client/server processing).
.PP
However, \fIfb_fetch\fP will also calculate and produce a formula (virtual)
field in \fIs\fP.
The \fIFB_FLD\fP macro will not accomplish this formula retrieval.
.PP
Also note that in the case of FB_BINARY fields, the entire field is ALWAYS fixed
length. So, it is up to the programmer using
\fIfb_fetch\fP(3) to make sure that \fIs\fP, the object being written into,
is the same byte size as the field length in the database dictionary.
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_fetch\fP routine will transparently
call \fIfb_fetch_clnt\fP
when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.SH SEE ALSO
getrec(3), opendb(3), database(4).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIFb_fetch\fP will return either FB_AOK or FB_ERROR as a return status.
.br
