.TH FIRSTXREC 3 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
firstxrec, lastxrec, firstovxrec, lastovxrec \- load first/last indexed record
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_firstxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.sp 1
fb_lastxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.sp 1
fb_firstovxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.sp 1
fb_lastovxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.sp 1
fb_currentxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the \fIdatabase\fP(4) manual page,
a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including an array of
field structures, all file names and descriptors, and index information.
Altogether, the array of field structures can hold one complete record.
.PP
\fIFb_firstxrec\fP attempts to load the first indexed record into database
\fIdb\fP.
\fIFb_lastxrec\fP attempts to load the last indexed record into database
\fIdb\fP.
These two calls are applicable to any kind of \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.PP
Note: the following discussion concerns normal (flat) \fIFirstBase\fP
indexes and does not apply to btree indexes. See \fIbtree\fP(4) for more
details on the \fIFirstBase\fP Btree+ indexes.
.PP
As noted in the \fIindex\fP(4) manual page, autoindexes can have a section
of index entries that are not sorted. This index overflow area can still be
accessed.
\fIFb_firstovxrec\fP attempts to load the first overflow
record from the index into database \fIdb\fP.
\fIFb_lastovxrec\fP attempts to load the last overflow record into database
\fIdb\fP.
.PP
Note that \fInextxrec\fP(3) and \fIprevxrec\fP(3) do not care about the
boundary between sorted and overflow index records. For example, 
an \fIfb_nextxrec\fP after an \fIfb_lastxrec\fP is equivalent to an
\fIfb_firstovxrec\fP.
.PP
Once a record number is retrieved from the index,
each of these routines call \fIgetrec\fP(3) to
load the record into the database structure.
.PP
The physical position number of the index entry, the index record number,
is stored in the database structure \fIdb->bsrec\fP for each of these
routines.
If \fIdb->bsrec\fP is greater
than \fIdb->bsend\fP, the returned record's key is stored in the overflow area
of the index, otherwise it is stored in the binary searchable area.
.PP
The \fIfb_currentxrec\fP mechanism will load the current index record.
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_firstxrec\fP and \fIfb_lastxrec\fP routines will transparently
call \fIfb_firstxrec_clnt\fP and \fIfb_lastxrec_clnt\fP
when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.SH SEE ALSO
getxrec(3), getrec(3), nextxrec(3), opendb(3), database(4), index(4).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
These routines will return FB_AOK on a successful call, and FB_ERROR when
the record could not be found or loaded.
.br
