.TH FIRSTBASE 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
firstbase \- run \fIFirstBase\fP menu shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B firstbase
[\fB-d\fP \fIdatabase\fP] [\fB-i\fP \fIindex\fP]
[\fB-s\fP \fIscreen\fP]
[\fB-v\fP \fIview\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIfirstbase\fP command (also executed as \fIfb\fP)
runs the \fIFirstBase\fP
menu shell using a provided menu file. This menu file provides
an entry point to all of the \fIFirstBase\fP tools, and a few of the
standard UNIX
tools. The name of a database, index, and screen can be optionally
provided. See \fIdbshell\fP(1) for more details.
.PP
The \fIfirstbase\fP command
is actually best implemented as an alias of the command
.I dbshell.
However, \fIfirstbase\fP is released as a simple shell script, located in the
\fIscripts\fP directory within the firstbase home directory ($FIRSTBASEHOME,
the installation directory).
Note that any \fIFirstBase\fP utility may be run directly from the
command line.
.PP
See the \fIFirstBase User's Guide\fP for an exact picture of the MAIN menu
screen.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of \fIFirstBase\fP database and screen.
.TP 10
index
default name of \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.cdb
actual \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.map
record map of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idx
index for \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.ddict
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
*.idict
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
*.sdict
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP screen.
.TP 10
*.idict?
dictionary for \fIFirstBase\fP generators.
.TP 10
$FIRSTBASEHOME/menu/*
standard \fIFirstBase\fP menu shell files.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
firstbase(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual.
.br
