.TH GETHEAD 3 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
gethead, puthead \- read and write database header
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_gethead(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.sp 1
fb_puthead(fd, reccnt, delcnt)
.br
int fd;
.br
long reccnt;
.br
long delcnt;
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the
\fIdatabase\fP(4) manual page, a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including
file names, descriptors and other variables.
\fIFb_gethead\fP reads the record count and the delete count
from a database and stores the
results in the database structure pointed to by \fIdb\fP.
.PP
Formally, \fIfb_gethead\fP reads the db->reccnt and db->delcnt variables
from the database defined by \fIdb\fP.
.PP
\fIFb_puthead\fP
is the routine used to write a database header. Because there are
tools that create databases without the use of \fIfb_opendb\fP or a formal
database structure (fb_database *db), the \fIfb_puthead\fP mechanism uses a
different form of arguments than \fIfb_gethead\fP.
.PP
The arguments to \fIfb_puthead\fP are: \fIfd\fP, usually db->fd is accurate;
\fIreccnt\fP and \fIdelcnt\fP, again, usually db->reccnt and db->delcnt.
NOTE: \fIputhead\fP is usually not needed unless you are generating
FirstBase databases using buffered writes (see
$FIRSTBASEHOME/applications/sample_src/bload.c) or something similar. 
.SH SEE ALSO
database(4), opendb(3).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If \fIfb_gethead\fP fails due to a read or seek error, it will return
an FB_ERROR. An FB_AOK signal is returned on correct completion.
.PP
Note that neither \fIfb_gethead\fP nor \fIfb_puthead\fP
enforces any process locking around the
critical sections. \fIFirstBase\fP applications use the \fIfb_lock\fP
mechanism
to lock record zero (0), which implies the header record. To emulate this,
thereby assuring that the header is not changing while using these routines,
use a code fragment similar to the following:
.nj
.nf
.sp
.ft CW
   fb_lock(0, db, FB_WAIT);
   fb_gethead(db);
   fb_unlock(0, db);
.ft
.fi
.ju
.sp
.PP
Again, this will ensure the database header is not changing
during the actual reading of the information.
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_gethead\fP routine will transparently
call the \fIfb_gethead_clnt\fP mechanism
when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
opendb(3), lock(3), database(4).
.br
