.TH GETIREC 3 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
getirec \- read a database record, synchronize with btree index
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_getirec(rec, db)
.br
long rec;
.br
fb_database *db;
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the
\fIdatabase\fP(4) manual page, a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including an array of
field structures, all file names and descriptors, and index information.
Altogether, the array of field structures can hold one complete record.
.PP
\fIFb_getirec\fP
retrieves logical record \fIrec\fP from the database pointed to by \fIdb\fP
using \fIgetrec\fP(3).
.PP
Then, under a certain set of conditions, \fIfb_getirec\fP will synchronize
the current record with the current index so that subsequent calls to
\fInextxrec\fP(3) and \fIprevxrec\fP(3) locate the indexed records after and
before the database record \fIrec\fP.
.PP
The set of conditions where the synchronizing occurs is:
(a) the current index is a \fIbtree\fP index that is represented in the
\fIb_autoindex\fP array; (b) the \fIuseidx\fP(3) mechanism was used to
activate the current index.
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_getirec\fP routine will transparently
call the \fIfb_getirec_clnt\fP mechanism
when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.SH SEE ALSO
fetch(3), putrec(3), getrec(3), getxrec(3), opendb(3), useidx(3),
database(4), autoindex(5).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIFb_getirec\fP will return the error code FB_ERROR if any of its reads,
writes, or seeks fail. On correct reading of the record and synchronization
of the index, the status FB_AOK will be returned.
.br
