.TH GETREC 3 " 4 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
getrec
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_getrec(rec, db)
.br
long rec;
.br
fb_database *db;
.br
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the
\fIdatabase\fP(4) manual page, a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including an array of
field structures, all file names and descriptors, and index information.
Altogether, the array of field structures can hold one complete record.
.PP
\fIFb_getrec\fP
retrieves logical record \fIrec\fP from the database pointed to by \fIdb\fP
and initializes the array of field structures.
The map file descriptor stored in \fIdb->mfd\fP
is used to determine the location and length of the
record in the database. The database file descriptor,
stored in \fIdb->fd\fP, is used to read the indicated record.
.PP
As mentioned,
\fIfb_getrec\fP sets up all of the database field descriptors so each
individual field is readily available. Each field is accessed through
an array of field descriptors, or key pointers. The base of this array
is located in the database structure variable \fIdb->kp\fP.
.PP
A macro function, \fBFB_FLD(n, db)\fP can be used to access
field number \fIn\fP of database \fIdb\fP, or use \fIfetch\fP(3).
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_getrec\fP routine will transparently
call the \fIfb_getrec_clnt\fP mechanism
when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.SH SEE ALSO
fetch(3), putrec(3), getirec(3), getxrec(3), opendb(3), database(4).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIFb_getrec\fP will return the error code FB_ERROR if any of its reads,
writes, or seeks fail. On correct completion, the number of characters read
will be returned.
.PP
Note: \fIgetrec\fP will lock record 0 to gain exclusive access to
the database only if the LOCKLEVEL is \fB2\fP or more. See \fIsetup\fP(5).
.br
