.TH KEYBOARD 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
keyboard \- \fIFirstBase\fP keyboard map file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
 .firstbase-kbmap
.SH DESCRIPTION
The keyboard map file is used to bind keystroke sequences to
\fIFirstBase\fP actions and intraline editing commands. This map file is used
with
the \fIEditable Input\fP mode within \fIFirstBase\fP.
See \fIsetup\fP(5) and \fIinput\fP(5) on how to enable this input mode.
.PP
When a \fIFirstBase\fP tool is used with \fIEditable Input\fP, the keyboard
map is
loaded from a \fI.firstbase-kbmap\fP file located in either the $HOME
directory,
somewhere along $PATH, or in the \fIFirstBase\fP home directory, in this order.
The first file located is loaded.
.SH KEYBOARD MAP
The \fIFirstBase\fP keyboard map is a list of keyboard keystrokes,
or \fIsequences\fP,
and \fIEditable Input\fP commands, or \fIactions\fP. A \fIsequence\fP is
bound to an \fIaction\fP using the following syntax:
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
      setkey "sequence" action
.ft
.sp 1
.fi
.ju
.PP
The \fBsetkey\fP must be in the first character column \(em these are
the only lines that will be processed. Blanks and tabs are used
to separate the sequence and action parts of each \fIsetkey\fP line.
Comments beyond the action are started using a pound sign (\fB#\fP).
.SH SEQUENCE
Each \fIsequence\fP is a series of characters delimited with
double quotations. These characters (between the quote marks) represent
complete
escape and control keystroke sequences.
.PP
The first character of each sequence must be some kind of control character.
Subsequent characters can be of any type.
Function keys and arrow keys are in this category.
.PP
Control characters are denoted using one of the following:
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
   \\^  .... Control
   \\e  .... Escape
   \\^? .... Del
   \\\\   .... \\
.ft
.sp 1
.fi
.ju
.PP
For example, the sequence \fB\\^f\fP represents <CONTROL>-F, and \fB\\ek\fP
represents <ESCAPE>-k. In these examples, the <CONTROL> character is
depressed while typing the \fBf\fP character, but the <ESCAPE> is a single
keystroke by itself, followed by the single keystroke \fBk\fP.
.PP
A \fIsequence\fP can be as long as needed. Furthermore, multiple sequences
can be bound to the same \fIaction\fP.
.SH ACTION
The \fIaction\fP part of a \fIsetkey\fP line represents a \fIFirstBase\fP
signal or
an intraline editing command. Each action is a single word, or set of
hyphenated words with no blanks. The following is a complete set of all
\fIactions\fP allowed along with a few comments.
.sp 1
.RS 5
.PD 0
.TP 30
beginning-of-line
.TP 30
end-of-line
.TP 30
delete-char-forward
.TP 30
delete-char-backward
.TP 30
delete-to-beginning-of-line
.TP 30
delete-to-end-of-line
.TP 30
move-char-forward
.TP 30
move-char-backward
.TP 30
delete-word-forward
.TP 30
delete-word-backward
.TP 30
move-word-forward
.TP 30
move-word-backward
.TP 30
quit
quit from middle of command sequence
.TP 30
upcase-word
.TP 30
capitalize-word
.TP 30
downcase-word
.TP 30
end
general END signal
.TP 30
help
general HELP signal
.TP 30
abort
general ABORT keystroke
.TP 30
next
next field, database editors
.TP 30
prev
previous field, database editors
.TP 30
redraw
.TP 30
pagedown
database editors - pages, choice pages, etc.
.TP 30
pageup
database editors - pages, choice pages, etc.
.TP 30
bsignal
database editors - backward record
.TP 30
fsignal
database editors - forward record
.TP 30
ssignal
database editors - next matching record
.TP 30
qsignal
database editors - ratio of matching records
.TP 30
writerec
database editors - write record
.TP 30
deleterec
database editors - delete record
.TP 30
system-stop
UNIX stop - .firstbase-init controlled
.TP 30
system-interrupt
UNIX interrupt - sometimes allowed
.PD 0
.RE 5
.sp 1
.SH SAMPLE KEYBOARD MAP
The  following is a sample keyboard map. This map represents the
standard \fIFirstBase\fP keyboard bindings as released with
\fIFirstBase\fP.
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
# intraline editing commands
setkey "\\^a"	beginning-of-line
setkey "\\^e"	end-of-line
setkey "\\^d"	delete-char-forward
setkey "\\^?"	delete-char-backward
setkey "\\^u"	delete-to-beginning-of-line
setkey "\\^k"	delete-to-end-of-line
setkey "\\^f"	move-char-forward
setkey "\\^b"	move-char-backward
setkey "\\ed"	delete-word-forward
setkey "\\e\\^?"	delete-word-backward
setkey "\\^w"	delete-word-backward	# overload function 
setkey "\\ef"	move-word-forward
setkey "\\eb"	move-word-backward
setkey "\\^g"	quit
setkey "\\eu"	upcase-word
setkey "\\ec"	capitalize-word
setkey "\\el"	downcase-word

# standard FirstBase signals
setkey "\\e-"	end
setkey "\\^h"	help
setkey "\\^c"	abort                # general abort keystroke
setkey "\\^n"	next                 # next field, dbedit
setkey "\\^p"	prev                 # prev field, dbedit
setkey "\\^l"	redraw
setkey "\\^v"	pagedown             # dbedit data/choice pages ...
setkey "\\ev"	pageup               # dbedit data/choice pages ...
setkey "\\^x\\^b"	bsignal              # backward record, dbedit
setkey "\\^x\\^f"	fsignal              # forward record, dbedit
setkey "\\^x\\^s"	writerec             # dbedit writerec
setkey "\\^x0"	deleterec            # dbedit delete record

setkey "\\eh"	help

# UNIX system signals
setkey "\\e\\^z"	system-stop          # UNIX stop. setup(5).
setkey "\\e\\^c"	system-interrupt     # UNIX interrupt. sometimes allowed

# Arrow keys - may need tuning to your particular keyboard
setkey "\\e[A"	prev                 # example of an arrow key
setkey "\\e[B"	next                 # example of an arrow key
setkey "\\e[C"	move-char-forward    # example of an arrow key
setkey "\\e[D"	move-char-backward   # example of an arrow key
.ft
.fi
.ju
.sp 1
.SH SPECIAL CASES
A few standard \fIFirstBase\fP keystrokes are overloaded and built-in
to provide default bindings in certain situations. The following will all be
accepted as standard \fIFirstBase\fP signals when no input has been entered
(or altered) and such a signal is allowed.
.sp 1
.PD 0
.TP 10
-
END key. \fIFirstBase\fP standard END keystroke.
.TP 10
^F
fsignal. database editors - forward one record.
.TP 10
^B
bsignal. database editors - backward one record.
.TP 10
^D
dsignal. database editors - autodefault signal.
.TP 10
^Q
qsignal. database editors - report pattern matches.
.TP 10
^S
ssignal. database editors - locate next pattern match.
.TP 10
^E
esignal. dbshell - environment screen command.
.TP 10
^H
help. from first column of an input area.
.PD
.sp 1
.SH SEE ALSO
input(5), setup(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
