.TH NEXTXREC 3 "10 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
nextxrec, prevxrec \- load next/previous indexed record
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_nextxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.sp 1
fb_prevxrec(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the \fIdatabase\fP(4) manual page,
a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including an array of
field structures, all file names and descriptors, and index information.
Altogether, the array of field structures can hold one complete record.
.PP
\fIFb_nextxrec\fP attempts to load the next indexed record into
database \fIdb\fP.
If a record has not already been loaded using \fIfb_getxrec\fP(3) or a
similar index mechanism, then the initial call (and only the initial call)
to \fIfb_nextxrec\fP will load the 
the first indexed record (ala \fIfirstxrec\fP(3)).
To repeat a loop through all indexed records, use \fIfirstxrec\fP(3)
followed by \fInextxrec\fP, or use the \fIforxeach\fP(3) mechanism.
.PP
\fIFb_prevxrec\fP attempts to load the previous indexed record into database
\fIdb\fP.
If one record has not already been loaded, nothing is done.
.PP
Once a record number is retrieved from the index, \fIgetrec\fP(3) is used
by these routines to
actually load the record into the database structures.
.PP
When using a \fIFirstBase\fP flat index, 
the physical position number of the index entry, the index record number,
is stored in the database structure \fIdb->bsrec\fP.
If \fIdb->bsrec\fP is greater
than \fIdb->bsend\fP, the returned record's key is stored in the overflow area
of the index, otherwise it is stored in the binary searchable area.
.PP
However, when using a \fIFirstBase\fP Btree+ index, the \fIdb->bsrec\fP value
is actually the record number (not the index record number).
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_nextxrec\fP and \fIfb_prevxrec\fP routines will transparently
call the \fIfb_nextxrec_clnt\fP and \fIfb_prevxrec_clnt\fP
mechanisms when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP
is set to one. See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.SH SEE ALSO
getxrec(3), getrec(3), firstxrec(3), opendb(3), database(4), index(4).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
These routines will return FB_AOK on a successful call, and FB_ERROR when
the record could not be found or loaded.
.br
