.TH OPENDB 3 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
opendb, closedb \- open/close a \fIFirstBase\fP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_opendb(db, mode, ixflag, ixoption)
.br
fb_database *db;
.br
int mode;
.br
int ixflag;
.br
int ixoption;
.sp 1
fb_closedb(db)
.br
fb_database *db;
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
As explained in the \fIdatabase\fP(4)
manual page, a database structure contains
all of the elements needed for an entire database, including an array of
field structures, all file names and descriptors, and index information.
Altogether, the array of field structures can hold one complete record.
.PP
\fIFb_opendb\fP and \fIfb_closedb\fP provide mechanisms to open and close an
entire
database \(em including simple and autoindex structures. In other words, the
entire database structure is initialized, with all needed file descriptors
and structure pointers.
\fIFb_opendb\fP will also provide file name extensions if needed.
.PP
The database structure needs to be allocated and the
file names need to be in the
database structure prior to the \fIfb_opendb\fP call. Typically, these
preliminary tasks are done using \fIdballoc\fP(3) and \fIdbargs\fP(3).
.PP
The \fImode\fP reflects desired permissions to the
database, with three possibilities \(em READ, WRITE, and READWRITE.
If a database does not exist, and the mode is WRITE or READWRITE, 
\fIfb_opendb\fP creates a database and database map, and initializes both.
.PP
The other two parameters are for database indexes. \fIIxflag\fP can take on
three values. FB_NOINDEX means that no index will be opened at all.
FB_WITHINDEX indicates that only the database index is to be opened.
FB_ALLINDEX means that all indexes, including the autoindexes, are to be
opened.
.PP
\fIIxoption\fP controls what \fIfb_opendb\fP will do if index errors occur
during the database initialization.
It also has three possible settings.
FB_OPTIONAL_INDEX means that no error messages are produced.
FB_MAYBE_OPTIONAL_INDEX will make error messages appear, but
control returns to the caller.
FB_MUST_INDEX will make \fIfb_opendb\fP die after displaying the
error message.
.PP
Fb_closedb closes all open file descriptors (databases, indexes, and the
database map), and frees up (most) all allocated space.
.PP
NOTE: There are allocated areas that fb_closedb does not free up
due to the underlying \fIFirstBase\fP structures for handling more than one
open database. To free and reset these areas, use \fIfree_globals\fP(3)
after all the databases have been closed using \fIfb_closedb\fP.
.SH EXAMPLES
Before opening a database from a C program, the database needs to be
defined using the \fIFirstBase\fP tool \fIdbdbas\fP(1).
Then, assuming the database is
named \fIPhone\fP, the following could be used to initialize and
open this database without any indexes:
.nf
.sp 1
.ft CW
   fb_database *db;
   ...
   db = fb_dballoc();
   fb_dbargs("Phone", NIL, db);
   fb_opendb(db, READWRITE, FB_NOINDEX, 0);
.ft
.sp 1
.fi
As another example, the following code fragment will set up the database
variables and open the database named \fIPhone\fP using an index
named \fIClients\fP:
.nf
.sp 1
.ft CW
   fb_database *db;
   ...
   db = fb_dballoc();
   fb_dbargs("Phone", "Clients", db);
   fb_opendb(db, READWRITE, FB_WITH_INDEX, FB_MUST_INDEX);
.ft
.sp 1
.fi
.sp 1
.fi
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
dbase
default name of \fIFirstBase\fP database and screen.
.TP 10
index
default name of \fIFirstBase\fP index.
.TP 10
\\\\.cdb
extension of \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
\\\\.map
extension of record map for \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 10
\\\\.idx
extension of \fIFirstBase\fP database index.
.TP 10
\\\\.ddict
extension of \fIFirstBase\fP database dictionary.
.TP 10
\\\\.idict
extension of \fIFirstBase\fP database index dictionary.
.PD
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
The \fIfb_opendb\fP and \fIfb_closedb\fP routines will transparently
call the \fIfb_opendb_clnt\fP and \fIfb_closedb_clnt\fP
mechanisms when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP
is set to one. See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.SH SEE ALSO
database(4), index(4), dballoc(3), dbargs(3), openidx(3), fb_free_globals(3).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If \fIfb_opendb\fP
cannot open the database file, it will die with an error message.
However, if a program sets the global variable \fIcdb_returnerror\fP to one
before calling \fIfb_opendb\fP, then the process will not terminate on errors.
In this case, \fIfb_opendb\fP will return either FB_AOK or FB_ERROR. The global
variable \fIcdb_error\fP will be set on FB_ERROR returns. See \fIsetup\fP(5)
for details on these and other global variables.
.br
