.TH PRINTOUTS 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
printouts \- overview of \fIFirstBase\fP printouts (reports)
.SH SYNOPSIS
Description of \fIFirstBase\fP generated printouts
.SH DESCRIPTION
Most all
.I FirstBase
printouts (reports, labels and merged documents)
are actually written to a disk file.
This disk file is often referred to as the 'print image' of a report, etc.
Disk files are generated so as to defer printer queuing problems, as well
as to alleviate problems if the machine crashes while spooling.
.PP
.I FirstBase
system printouts (\fIdbpgen\fP(1))
are printer ready, and need no further formatting.
These reports always have a
.I title, company name, 
and 
.I page numbers.
These reports are formatted when generated. This means \fIFirstBase\fP inserts proper
padding for page breaks and page numbers.
.PP
Labels (\fIdblgen\fP(1))
are also printer ready.
These labels are compatible with plain paper
or peel-off labels. In dealing
with labels, there is no such thing as 'pages', so there
is no need to reset the formlength setting on printers.
.PP
Special printer dependent formatting characters are never used
so as to be compatible with virtually any 
printer.
.PP
Non standard printouts can also be developed in \fIFirstBase\fP through
the use of a text editor and \fIdbmerge\fP(1).
Once a format or template has been
created, \fIdbmerge\fP(1) can merge data from an indexed \fIFirstBase\fP
database 
with the user defined document. This allows mail merge,
free form printouts, and much, much more.
.PP
Other reports can be created using \fIdbvform\fP(1), a tool
that uses standard \fIview\fP(5) dictionaries and generates output
accordingly. The SQL tool, \fIdbsql\fP(1) can be used to generate
simple reports, too. There are also \fIdbawk\fP(1) and \fIdbmacro\fP(1)
tools for those desiring the utmost in control.
.PP
Note that all of these tools (except \fIdblgen\fP(1)) can write their
results to standard output instead of a disk file.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 10
*.prt
\fIdbpgen\fP(1) print image file of a printout (report).
.TP 10
*.lbl
\fIdblgen\fP(1) print image file of labels.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
firstbase(1), firstbase(5), dbdprt(1), dbpgen(1), dbdlbl(1), dblgen(1),
dbmerge(1), dbvform(1), dbawk(1), dbsql(1), dbmacro(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
