.TH SCREENS 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
screens \- \fIFirstBase\fP Screen Overview
.SH SYNOPSIS
Description of \fIFirstBase\fP program screens
.SH DESCRIPTION
All programs in the 
.I FirstBase
system use a standard screen or window through which users
watch execution of \fIFirstBase\fP programs. This screen contains various pieces
of information that the user should
be aware of.
.PP
.I FirstBase
screens reserve the first two or three lines 
and the last two lines for program information.
The top line contains three distinct area of information:
the name of the tool running, the title of the company or application,
and a status area.
.PP
The status information is updated often and 
always reflects the current state of the program that is
running.
.PP
The second line will contain other pieces of information at times, such as
the current record number or the view screen being used to edit with.
.PP
The 23rd line is used to display a footer to all programs, and
for error messages. This footer displays some relevant file name
information, database record and delete counts, index record and
organization counts, as well as the current user name, and the time.
Optionally, the working directory name is also displayed.
See \fIsetup\fP(5).
.PP
A single bell accompanies error messages, although visible bells are also
supported via termcap settings.
If recoverable, these messages
are displayed on the 23rd line.
If the error is non-recoverable, the error messages is displayed on the
24th line just before \fIFirstBase\fP exits.
.PP
Note that it is possible to completely turn off lines 1, 2, 23 and 24 of
standard \fIFirstBase\fP screen displays by using \fIsetup\fP(5)
variables. However, these lines are
still reserved even when turned off due to error messages and other
information that might need to be given to the user.
.SH SEE ALSO
firstbase(1), firstbase(5), coname(5), setup(5), terminals(5), libscr(3)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
