.TH SCRPRINT 1 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
scrprint, frmprint \- provide a menu interface for viewing and printing
report files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scrprint
\fIreport_file\fP
.br
.B frmprint
\fIraw_report_file\fP
.PD
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Scrprint
and \fIfrmprint\fP
provides a FirstBase look-and-feel menu interface for displaying or formatting
report files
as well as submitting print requests to various printers.
Note that all environment variables discussed here are UNIX environment
variables, not internal \fIFirstBase\fP settings.
.PP
The menu provided by \fIscrprint\fP is easy to use and follow.
The environment variable \fIPAGER\fP is used to page the file
to the screen, with the default being \fIfb_pager\fP, a simple paging
script located in the \fIFirstBase\fP home \fIscripts\fP directory.
.PP
Note that the standard UNIX paging tool, \fI/usr/ucb/more\fP, does not
pause at the end of display when there is less than a page of output.
However, the filter \fIfb_pager\fP will do this pausing when \fIPAGER\fP
is not set.
.PP
The \fIPRINTER\fP environment variable controls the default printer used.
Another environment variable, \fIEDITOR\fP, controls which
editor will be used when requested.
.PP
Still yet another environment variable, \fIHOME\fP, is used to alter
file names of the form \fI~/filename\fP by inserting the users home directory
before the copy request is executed. Furthermore, file names of the
form \fI~user/filename\fP are expanded properly using the home directory
of \fIuser\fP as listed in the \fIpasswd\fP(5) file.
.PP
Some computer systems support a Post Script filter. If the environment
variable \fIPSPRINT\fP is set to a filter, and a printer named \fIps\fP
is chosen, then \fIscrprint\fP will ask for a margin to use as well.
This margin is passed on the the \fIPSPRINT\fP filter as a
\fI-m margin\fP flag.
.PP
Unlike \fIscrprint\fP, the \fIraw_report_file\fP given to
\fIfrmprint\fP is \fInot\fP pre-formatted. Instead, \fIfrmprint\fP
will format the \fIraw_report_file\fP and print directly to a printer
capable of the print request, like a high resolution laser printer.
.PP
A few additional UNIX environment variables are used to
control how \fIfrmprint\fP formats its \fIraw_report_file\fP.
\fIFB_TBL\fP, \fIFB_TROFF\fP, \fIFB_TROFF_OPTIONS\fP, and
\fIFB_TROFF_PRINTFLAG\fP are used to piece together the raw report.
The following is a sample set of values used for these system
dependent variables:
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
   PRINTER                      lpr
   FIRSTBASE_TBL                tbl
   FIRSTBASE_TROFF              ditroff
   FIRSTBASE_TROFF_OPTIONS      -me
   FIRSTBASE_TROFF_PRINTFLAG    -P
.ft
.fi
.ju
.sp 1
.PP
In the above example, \fIfrmprint\fP will use following command to
format the raw report file:
.sp 1
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
   tbl raw_report_file | ditroff -me -Plpr
.ft
.fi
.ju
.sp 1
.PP
As with all FirstBase tools, the standard END keystroke will exit.
A \fBq\fP will do the same thing as well.
.PD
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 16
fb_pager
the default paging tool used by \fIFirstBase\fP when PAGER is not set.
.SH SEE ALSO
input(5).
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fIScrnprint\fP(8)
will ask permission before overwriting an existing file.
.br
