.TH SETUP 3 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
setup, setup_argv \- initialize \fIFirstBase\fP environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <firstbase/fb.h>
.sp 1
fb_setup()
.sp 1
fb_setup_argv(argc, argv)
.br
int argc;
.br
char *argv[];
.sp 1
fb_set_loadfail(flag)
.br
int flag;
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The basic \fIfb_setup\fP mechanism processes the initialization
file \fI.firstbase-init\fP (\fI.fb-init\fP on some machines)
as described in \fIsetup\fP(5).
Normally, \fIfb_setup\fP will be called from \fIopendb\fP(3), but there
are times when \fIfb_opendb\fP is not used at all.
.PP
NOTE: Due to the structure of the \fIFirstBase\fP engine, \fIsetup\fP contains
the data space for many global variables, and therefore \fBmust\fP be called.
In other words, if you don't use \fIopendb\fP, you must use \fIsetup\fP.
.PP
\fISetup\fP will initialize global variables and process
any site and user dependent setup options.
.PP
To pass command line variables to \fIFirstBase\fP at run time,
use the \fIfb_setup_argv\fP call and pass in the \fIargc\fP and \fIargv\fP
parameters. This is the same as a call to \fIfb_setup\fP, but the command
line (argument vector) is parsed as well as initialization files.
.PP
The \fIfb_set_loadfail\fP routine will set a global variable
which controls the loading of the failure point of a \fIgetxrec\fP(3) call.
Use a \fIflag\fP of 1 (one) to turn this feature on or 0 (zero) to turn it off.
.SH VARIABLES
Many of the setup variables are tunable from a C program. Unless
otherwise indicated, these are \fBshort int\fP variables and will
need to be externally defined in each C module as needed.
Common ones are:
.sp 1
.PD 0
.TP 15
cdb_batchmode
set to 1 to disable screen conditioning and displays
.TP 15
cdb_datestyle
set to 1 for American date style (MMDDYY) and to 2 for European style (DDMMYY).
.TP 15
cdb_datedisplay
set to 8 for display as MM/DD/YY, to 10 for MM/DD/YYYY and to 11 for
.TP 15
cdb_fixedwidth
set to 1 to cause the FirstBase engine to store all records as fixed width
records.
.TP 15
cdb_locklevel
set to desired locking level. See \fIsetup\fP(5).
.TP 15
cdb_locktime
set to number of seconds before a blocking lock request will time out.
.TP 15
cdb_lockmessage
set to 0, 1, or 2 to control whether lock error messages will be ignored,
printed and skipped, or fully interactive in asking for a retry.
.TP 15
cdb_returnerror
set to 1 causes some functions to
return on errors, rather than exit. Sets \fIcdb_error\fP.
.TP 15
cdb_rpc_retries
represents the number of times a server connection is attempted
before failure occurs. The default is 10.
.TP 15
cdb_use_rpc
set to 1 to cause many FirstBase routines to use the client/server mechanism
instead of the normal mechanism.
.PD
.SH FIRSTBASE SYMBOLS
.PP
The FirstBase libraries uses a canonical set of prefixes.
The following set of symbol prefixes are used throughout \fIFirstBase\fP:
.sp 1
.PD 0
.TP 15
FB_
\fIFirstBase\fP macro definitions.
.TP 15
fb_
\fIFirstBase\fP functions.
.TP 15
cdb_
\fIFirstBase\fP global variables.
.TP 15
CHAR_
\fIFirstBase\fP character constants.
.TP 15
S_
\fIFirstBase\fP system error message macro constants.
.PD
.SH CLIENT/SERVER
.PP
The \fIfb_setup\fP and \fIfb_setup_argv\fP
routines will transparently initialize a \fIFirstBase\fP
client server connection using \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3)
when the global \fIFirstBase\fP variable \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
This means a process only needs to set the \fBshort int\fP \fIcdb_use_rpc\fP
to one before calling \fIfb_setup\fP to begin a client server connection.
See \fIfb_clnt_create\fP(3) for more details.
.PP
In addition, the \fIfb_set_loadfail\fP mechanism will properly notify
the \fIFirstBase\fP database server of the \fIflag\fP value when
\fIcdb_use_rpc\fP is set to one.
.SH SEE ALSO
opendb(3), free_globals(3), fb_exit(3).
.br
