.TH TERMINALS 5 " 4 April 1996"
.FB
.SH NAME
terminals \- \fIFirstBase\fP Terminal Overview
.SH SYNOPSIS
Description of \fIFirstBase\fP terminal requirements
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIFirstBase\fP system requires only a few
terminal control codes (escape sequences):
.TP 15
clear()
clear the screen (cl)
.TP 15
clrtobot()
clear from cursor to bottom of screen (cd)
.TP 15
clrtoeol()
clear from cursor to end of line (ce)
.TP 15
move(x, y)
move cursor to absolute row,col (cm)
.PP
A few other terminal description fields are also supported:
.TP 15
standout
Begin Standout mode (so)
.TP 15
standend
End Standout mode (se)
.TP 15
reverse
Begin Standout mode (mr)
.TP 15
revend
End Standout mode (me)
.TP 15
lines
Lines on terminal (li)
.TP 15
columns
Columns on terminal (co)
.PP
Additionally, support for arrow and function keys is handled by
the standard \fItermcap\fP(5) capabilities \fBku\fP, \fBkd\fP,
\fBkl\fP, \fBkr\fP, and \fBk0\fP through \fBk9\fP.
These termcap entries are designed
to let the software know what strings are being emitted by what terminal
keys.
.PP
When an arrow or function key is depressed, the string it emits is looked up
to see if it is in one of the above mentioned \fBk\fP slots.
If a match occurs, then
the internal \fIFirstBase\fP signal corresponding to that \fBk\fP slot (as 
defined in \fIsetup\fP(5)) will be generated for the waiting software.
.PP
Note that function keys are either a single <CONTROL> character
or a sequence of characters starting with an ESCAPE character.
Variable length escape sequences are supported.
.PP
The \fItermcap\fP(5) terminal database is used by all
of the tools in \fIFirstBase\fP. This includes
support for the 'visible bell' feature. Transparent support is provided for
the \fIterminfo\fP(5) style database as well. The Unix environment variables
TERMCAP and TERM are used to locate the termcap file and the specific
entry in the terminal capabilities database.
.PP
Note that the \fIFirstBase\fP tools can make a distinction between standout
video and reverse video
modes. This distinction is not usually supplied by the \fItermcap\fP(5)
database routines. The termcap codes for 'begin reverse'
and for 'end reverse' can be listed as 'mr' and 'me' respectively.
Of course, if you use reverse video for your standout mode, then this
added distinction will not be needed.
.PP
The lines and columns termcap settings are used to define the shape of the
window being used with the \fIFirstBase\fP tools. When using \fIFirstBase\fP
interactively, a minimum screen must be at least 24 x 80.
But, devices allowing larger windows may use them.
However, two notes: 1) only \fIdbvedit\fP(1) and \fIdbshell\fP(1)
can actually uses this larger window, and 2)
only the 'lines', not the columns, termcap entry is utilized.
.PP
In addition, FirstBase will try and read the number of lines
used by the current window after the termcap setting is used.
So, if the user shrinks or expands the window,
FirstBase will reset the LINES variable accordingly.
.PP
Tools which are run in batchmode (non-interactively) by using the \fB-b\fP
argument line switch will not be subject to the above terminal constraints.
Furthermore, non-\fIFirstBase\fP tools wanting to use larger windows can use
the \fB-fullscreen\fP argument line option to bypass the normal
24 X 80 default.
The lines entry from the termcap setting can also be set by
using the LINES environment variable (\fIsetup\fP(5)).
This allows disabling the lines settings as described by the termcap.
.SH SEE ALSO
firstbase(1), firstbase(5), termcap(5), screens(5), setup(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
