.TH VISUAL 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
visual/filter \- visual and filter files used with \fIdbedit\fP(1)
.SH SYNOPSIS
 .visual
.sp
 .filter
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
When \fIdbedit\fP(1)
is asked to pop into 'visual' (or 'filter') mode on a field,
a \fI.visual\fP (or \fI.filter\fP )
file is found, and the contents of the file are used as a
command the UNIX system will execute.
.PP
Alternately, the standard UNIX environment
variable \fIEDITOR\fP can be used to override
the \fI.visual\fP file.
.PP
This feature allows different people to customize the editor that
\fIdbedit\fP(1) will default to when asked to go into its visual mode.
For example, some users may prefer \fIedit\fP(1) to \fIvi\fP(1).
.PP
The search path is the same as that for the company name file:
First the working directory is searched. Then the users PATH is
searched, and finally, the \fIFirstBase\fP home directory is searched \(em all looking
for a file named \fI.visual\fP (or \fI.filter\fP).
.PP
A disabling lock can be placed to disable these features as well.
This is accomplished by placing an empty file named \fI.visual_lck\fP
(or \fI.filter_lck\fP) somewhere along the same search path.
If this lock file \fIexists\fP, then the requested command is not
allowed to run.
.PP
Since the FIRSTBASEHOME environment variable can be used to tune the
actual \fIFirstBase\fP home directory, a hardwired directory, \fI/usr/lib/firstbase\fP,
is always searched for these lock files.
.PP
Note that the same locking mechanism is used to keep users from starting
up sub-processes from within dbedit(1). This lock is the \fI.cshell_lck\fP.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 16
 .visual
visual command.
.TP 16
 .visual_lck
visual process lock.
.TP 16
 .filter
filter command.
.TP 16
 .filter_lck
filter process lock.
.TP 16
 .cshell_lck
sub process lock.
.TP 16
/usr/lib/firstbase
hardwired "system" lock directory.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbedit(1), dbdind(1)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
