.TH XCHOICE 5 "12 September 1995"
.FB
.SH NAME
xchoice \- extended choice file for data entry
.SH SYNOPSIS
Layout of the \fIFirstBase\fP extended choice files
.SH DESCRIPTION
A \fIFirstBase\fP
extended choicefile is a file that is used from \fIdbvedit\fP(1)
to provide strict control over data entry of a particular field.
The idea is that the
user does not need to actually type out all of the input for a given
field, but rather chooses a selection whose corresponding meaning is
then inserted into the field.
.PP
This makes uniform data entry for fields with a set of known values
quite easy \(em and eases the typing required for long, duplicate entries.
.PP
\fIFirstBase\fP extended choice fields behave very much like normal choice
fields \(em the only difference is the storage \fIlocation\fP of
the choices \fIdbvedit\fP(1) displays to the user. As explained in
\fIchoices\fP(5), normal choice selections are stored directly in the 
choicefile itself.
.PP
However, for extended choice fields, the choices are stored in
a standard \fIFirstBase\fP database, and are accessed using
a \fIFirstBase\fP index.
Maintenance of the stored choices themselves becomes a simple
database task using this feature.
.PP
Another feature of extended choices is fields from the
current database are used to filter the choices presented during
extended choice display. This feature allows the use of very large
databases of choice selections which are filtered into a
small subset of choices displayed during the actual extended choice
selection.
.PP
Additionally, there is a setup variable, EX_FORCEONE, which, if set to ON,
will cause the extended choice mechanism to force the choice selection
when there is only a single choice to choose from.
.PP
The extended choicefile is really a data dictionary
extension of the standard database dictionary. Inside of the extended
choicefile are pointers to the choice database and index, display fields,
filter fields, a return field, and optional comment and helpfile lines.
.PP
The following is a list of the lines in an extended choicefile:
.nf
.nj
.ft CW
.sp 1
   a) $DBASE dbase
   b) $INDEX index
   c) $FILTERS \fIlocal-field\fP [\fIlocal-field\fP ...]
   d) $DISPLAYS \fIchoice-database-field\fP [\fIchoice-database-field\fP ...]
   e) $RETURN \fIchoice-database-field\fP
   f) $HELP helpfile 
   g) $PROMPT Prompt_String
   h) "Text Text Text":row,col
.ft
.fi
.ju
.PP
Here is an explanation of each of the sections:
.TP 12
$DBASE
The choice database. Must be a valid \fIFirstBase\fP database.
.TP 12
$INDEX
The choice index. Must be a valid \fIFirstBase\fP index, generated from the
database indicated by $DBASE. Furthermore, this index \fBMUST\fP
be \fIsorted by\fP a superset (or complete set) of all the fields requested
in the $FILTERS line.
.sp 1
For example, if you want to filter by FieldA and by FieldB,
then the choice database itself should contain FieldA and FieldB,
and the choice database index should be generated (\fIdbigen\fP(1)) so
that the result is sorted by FieldA then by FieldB (in that order).
.TP 12
$FILTERS
The fields from the current database that will be used to generate a search
key request for matching choice database records.
An error message will  display if no extended choice selections fit
the contents of the $FILTERS line.
Note: these fields are logically related to the architecture of the
$INDEX specificed, as detailed above.
.TP 12
$DISPLAYS
The fields from the choice database that will be displayed in
a spreadsheet manner during extended choice display.
Only records matching the $FILTERS will be displayed.
.TP 12
$RETURN
The \fIone\fP field from the choice database that will be returned
when a valid extended choice is selected.
.TP 12
$HELP
A pointer to yet another help file that can be paged to the screen during
the extended choice display by use of <CTL>-H or <FUNCTION>-HELP.
.TP 12
$PROMPT
A string value used as the prompt for this extended choice selection.
The default value is the same as PROMPT_CHOICEMSG.
.TP 12
"Text Text":row,col
Persistent comments that are mapped to the screen using the standard
view dictionary screen text mapping mechanism.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
dbedit(1), dbdbas(1), choice(5), setup(5)
.PP
.I FirstBase User's Guide and Reference Manual
.br
